1885:
To the Congress of the United States:

Your assembling is clouded by a sense of public bereavement, caused by the
recent and sudden death of Thomas A. Hendricks, Vice-President of the
United States. His distinguished public services, his complete integrity
and devotion to every duty, and his personal virtues will find honorable
record in his country's history.

Ample and repeated proofs of the esteem and confidence in which he was held
by his fellow-countrymen were manifested by his election to offices of the
most important trust and highest dignity; and at length, full of years and
honors, he has been laid at rest amid universal sorrow and benediction.

The Constitution, which requires those chosen to legislate for the people
to annually meet in the discharge of their solemn trust, also requires the
President to give to Congress information of the state of the Union and
recommend to their consideration such measures as he shall deem necessary
and expedient. At the threshold of a compliance with these constitutional
directions it is well for us to bear in mind that our usefulness to the
people's interests will be promoted by a constant appreciation of the scope
and character of our respective duties as they relate to Federal
legislation. While the Executive may recommend such measures as he shall
deem expedient, the responsibility for legislative action must and should
rest upon those selected by the people to make their laws.

Contemplation of the grave and responsible functions assigned to the
respective branches of the Government under the Constitution will disclose
the partitions of power between our respective departments and their
necessary independence, and also the need for the exercise of all the power
intrusted to each in that spirit of comity and cooperation which is
essential to the proper fulfillment of the patriotic obligations which rest
upon us as faithful servants of the people.

The jealous watchfulness of our constituencies, great and small,
supplements their suffrages, and before the tribunal they establish every
public servant should be judged.

It is gratifying to announce that the relations of the United States with
all foreign powers continue to be friendly. Our position after nearly a
century of successful constitutional government, maintenance of good faith
in all our engagements, the avoidance of complications with other nations,
and our consistent and amicable attitude toward the strong and weak alike
furnish proof of a political disposition which renders professions of good
will unnecessary. There are no questions of difficulty pending with any
foreign government.

The Argentine Government has revived the long dormant question of the
Falkland Islands by claiming from the United States indemnity for their
loss, attributed to the action of the commander of the sloop of war
Lexington in breaking up a piratical colony on those islands in 1831, and
their subsequent occupation by Great Britain. In view of the ample
justification for the act of the Lexington and the derelict condition of
the islands before and after their alleged occupation by Argentine
colonists, this Government considers the claim as wholly groundless.

Question has arisen with the Government of Austria-Hungary touching the
representation of the United States at Vienna. Having under my
constitutional prerogative appointed an estimable citizen of unimpeached
probity and competence as minister at that court, the Government of
Austria-Hungary invited this Government to take cognizance of certain
exceptions, based upon allegations against the personal acceptability of
Mr. Keiley, the appointed envoy, asking that in view thereof the
appointment should be withdrawn. The reasons advanced were such as could
not be acquiesced in without violation of my oath of office and the
precepts of the Constitution, since they necessarily involved a limitation
in favor of a foreign government upon the right of selection by the
Executive and required such an application of a religious test as a
qualification for office under the United States as would have resulted in
the practical disfranchisement of a large class of our citizens and the
abandonment of a vital principle in our Government. The Austro-Hungarian
Government finally decided not to receive Mr. Keiley as the envoy of the
United States, and that gentleman has since resigned his commission,
leaving the post vacant. I have made no new nomination, and the interests
of this Government at Vienna are now in the care of the secretary of
legation, acting as charge d'affaires ad interim.

Early in March last war broke out in Central America, caused by the attempt
of Guatemala to consolidate the several States into a single government. In
these contests between our neighboring States the United States forebore to
interfere actively, but lent the aid of their friendly offices in
deprecation of war and to promote peace and concord among the belligerents,
and by such counsel contributed importantly to the restoration of
tranquillity in that locality.

Emergencies growing out of civil war in the United States of Colombia
demanded of the Government at the beginning of this Administration the
employment of armed forces to fulfill its guaranties under the thirty-fifth
article of the treaty of 1846, in order to keep the transit open across the
Isthmus of Panama. Desirous of exercising only the powers expressly
reserved to us by the treaty, and mindful of the rights of Colombia, the
forces sent to the Isthmus were instructed to confine their action to
"positively and efficaciously" preventing the transit and its accessories
from being "interrupted or embarrassed."

The execution of this delicate and responsible task necessarily involved
police control where the local authority was temporarily powerless, but
always in aid of the sovereignty of Colombia.

The prompt and successful fulfillment of its duty by this Government was
highly appreciated by the Government of Colombia, and has been followed by
expressions of its satisfaction.

High praise is due to the officers and men engaged in this service. The
restoration of peace on the Isthmus by the reestablishment of the
constituted Government there being thus accomplished, the forces of the
United States were withdrawn.

Pending these occurrences a question of much importance was presented by
decrees of the Colombian Government proclaiming the closure of certain
ports then in the hands of insurgents and declaring vessels held by the
revolutionists to be piratical and liable to capture by any power. To
neither of these propositions could the United States assent. An effective
closure of ports not in the possession of the Government, but held by
hostile partisans, could not be recognized; neither could the vessels of
insurgents against the legitimate sovereignty be deemed hostes humani
generis within the precepts of international law, whatever might be the
definition and penalty of their acts under the municipal law of the State
against whose authority they were in revolt. The denial by this Government
of the Colombian propositions did not, however, imply the admission of a
belligerent status on the part of the insurgents.

The Colombian Government has expressed its willingness to negotiate
conventions for the adjustment by arbitration of claims by foreign citizens
arising out of the destruction of the city of Aspinwall by the
insurrectionary forces.

The interest of the United States in a practicable transit for ships across
the strip of land separating the Atlantic from the Pacific has been
repeatedly manifested during the last half century.

My immediate predecessor caused to be negotiated with Nicaragua a treaty
for the construction, by and at the sole cost of the United States, of a
canal through Nicaraguan territory, and laid it before the Senate. Pending
the action of that body thereon, I withdrew the treaty for reexamination.
Attentive consideration of its provisions leads me to withhold it from
resubmission to the Senate.

Maintaining, as I do, the tenets of a line of precedents from Washington's
day, which proscribe entangling alliances with foreign states, I do not
favor a policy of acquisition of new and distant territory or the
incorporation of remote interests with our own.

The laws of progress are vital and organic, and we must be conscious of
that irresistible tide of commercial expansion which, as the concomitant of
our active civilization, day by day is being urged onward by those
increasing facilities of production, transportation, and communication to
which steam and electricity have given birth; but our duty in the present
instructs us to address ourselves mainly to the development of the vast
resources of the great area committed to our charge and to the cultivation
of the arts of peace within our own borders, though jealously alert in
preventing the American hemisphere from being involved in the political
problems and complications of distant governments. Therefore I am unable to
recommend propositions involving paramount privileges of ownership or
right outside of our own territory, when coupled with absolute and
unlimited engagements to defend the territorial integrity of the state
where such interests lie. While the general project of connecting the two
oceans by means of a canal is to be encouraged, I am of opinion that any
scheme to that end to be considered with favor should be free from the
features alluded to.

The Tehuantepec route is declared by engineers of the highest repute and by
competent scientists to afford an entirely practicable transit for vessels
and cargoes, by means of a ship railway, from the Atlantic to the Pacific.
The obvious advantages of such a route, if feasible, over others more
remote from the axial lines of traffic between Europe and the pacific, and
particularly between the Valley of the Mississippi and the western coast of
North and South America, are deserving of consideration.

Whatever highway may be constructed across the barrier dividing the two
greatest maritime areas of the world must be for the world's benefit--a
trust for mankind, to be removed from the chance of domination by any
single power, nor become a point of invitation for hostilities or a prize
for warlike ambition. An engagement combining the construction, ownership,
and operation of such a work by this Government, with an offensive and
defensive alliance for its protection, with the foreign state whose
responsibilities and rights we would share is, in my judgment, inconsistent
with such dedication to universal and neutral use, and would, moreover,
entail measures for its realization beyond the scope of our national polity
or present means.

The lapse of years has abundantly confirmed the wisdom and foresight of
those earlier Administrations which, long before the conditions of maritime
intercourse were changed and enlarged by the progress of the age,
proclaimed the vital need of interoceanic transit across the American
Isthmus and consecrated it in advance to the common use of mankind by their
positive declarations and through the formal obligation of treaties. Toward
such realization the efforts of my Administration will be applied, ever
bearing in mind the principles on which it must rest, and which were
declared in no uncertain tones by Mr. Cass, who, while Secretary of State,
in 1858, announced that "what the United States want in Central America,
next to the happiness of its people, is the security and neutrality of the
interoceanic routes which lead through it."

The construction of three transcontinental lines of railway, all in
successful operation, wholly within our territory, and uniting the Atlantic
and the Pacific oceans, has been accompanied by results of a most
interesting and impressive nature, and has created new conditions, not in
the routes of commerce only, but in political geography, which powerfully
affect our relations toward and necessarily increase our interests in any
transisthmian route which may be opened and employed for the ends of peace
and traffic, or, in other contingencies, for uses inimical to both.

Transportation is a factor in the cost of commodities scarcely second to
that of their production, and weighs as heavily upon the consumer.

Our experience already has proven the great importance of having the
competition between land carriage and water carriage fully developed, each
acting as a protection to the public against the tendencies to monopoly
which are inherent in the consolidation of wealth and power in the hands of
vast corporations.

These suggestions may serve to emphasize what I have already said on the
score of the necessity of a neutralization of any interoceanic transit; and
this can only be accomplished by making the uses of the route open to all
nations and subject to the ambitions and warlike necessities of none.

The drawings and report of a recent survey of the Nicaragua Canal route,
made by Chief Engineer Menocal, will be communicated for your information.

The claims of citizens of the United States for losses by reason of the
late military operations of Chile in Peru and Bolivia are the subject of
negotiation for a claims convention with Chile, providing for their
submission to arbitration.

The harmony of our relations with China is fully sustained.

In the application of the acts lately passed to execute the treaty of 1880,
restrictive of the immigration of Chinese laborers into the United States,
individual cases of hardship have occurred beyond the power of the
Executive to remedy, and calling for judicial determination.

The condition of the Chinese question in the Western States and Territories
is, despite this restrictive legislation, far from being satisfactory. The
recent outbreak in Wyoming Territory, where numbers of unoffending
Chinamen, indisputably within the protection of the treaties and the law,
were murdered by a mob, and the still more recent threatened outbreak of
the same character in Washington Territory, are fresh in the minds of all,
and there is apprehension lest the bitterness of feeling against the
Mongolian race on the Pacific Slope may find vent in similar lawless
demonstrations. All the power of this Government should be exerted to
maintain the amplest good faith toward China in the treatment of these men,
and the inflexible sternness of the law in bringing the wrongdoers to
justice should be insisted upon.

Every effort has been made by this Government to prevent these violent
outbreaks and to aid the representatives of China in their investigation of
these outrages; and it is but just to say that they are traceable to the
lawlessness of men not citizens of the United States engaged in competition
with Chinese laborers.

Race prejudice is the chief factor in originating these disturbances, and
it exists in a large part of our domain, jeopardizing our domestic peace
and the good relationship we strive to maintain with China.

The admitted right of a government to prevent the influx of elements
hostile to its internal peace and security may not be questioned, even
where there is no treaty stipulation on the subject. That the exclusion of
Chinese labor is demanded in other countries where like conditions prevail
is strongly evidenced in the Dominion of Canada, where Chinese immigration
is now regulated by laws more exclusive than our own. If existing laws are
inadequate to compass the end in view, I shall be prepared to give earnest
consideration to any further remedial measures, within the treaty limits,
which the wisdom of Congress may devise.

The independent State of the Kongo has been organized as a government under
the sovereignty of His Majesty the King of the Belgians, who assumes its
chief magistracy in his personal character only, without making the new
State a dependency of Belgium. It is fortunate that a benighted region,
owing all it has of quickening civilization to the beneficence and
philanthropic spirit of this monarch, should have the advantage and
security of his benevolent supervision.

The action taken by this Government last year in being the first to
recognize the flag of the International Association of the Kongo has been
followed by formal recognition of the new nationality which succeeds to its
sovereign powers.

A conference of delegates of the principal commercial nations was held at
Berlin last winter to discuss methods whereby the Kongo basin might be kept
open to the world's trade. Delegates attended on behalf of the United
States on the understanding that their part should be merely deliberative,
without imparting to the results any binding character so far as the United
States were concerned. This reserve was due to the indisposition of this
Government to share in any disposal by an international congress of
jurisdictional questions in remote foreign territories. The results of the
conference were embodied in a formal act of the nature of an international
convention, which laid down certain obligations purporting to be binding on
the signatories, subject to ratification within one year. Notwithstanding
the reservation under which the delegates of the United States attended,
their signatures were attached to the general act in the same manner as
those of the plenipotentiaries of other governments, thus making the United
States appear, without reserve or qualification, as signatories to a joint
international engagement imposing on the signers the conservation of the
territorial integrity of distant regions where we have no established
interests or control.

This Government does not, however, regard its reservation of liberty of
action in the premises as at all impaired; and holding that an engagement
to share in the obligation of enforcing neutrality in the remote valley of
the Kongo would be an alliance whose responsibilities we are not in a
position to assume, I abstain from asking the sanction of the Senate to
that general act.

The correspondence will be laid before you, and the instructive and
interesting report of the agent sent by this Government to the Kongo
country and his recommendations for the establishment of commercial
agencies on the African coast are also submitted for your consideration.

The commission appointed by my predecessor last winter to visit the Central
and South American countries and report on the methods of enlarging the
commercial relations of the United States therewith has submitted reports,
which will be laid before you.

No opportunity has been omitted to testify the friendliness of this
Government toward Korea, whose entrance into the family of treaty powers
the United States were the first to recognize. I regard with favor the
application made by the Korean Government to be allowed to employ American
officers as military instructors, to which the assent of Congress becomes
necessary, and I am happy to say this request has the concurrent sanction
of China and Japan.

The arrest and imprisonment of Julio R. Santos, a citizen of the United
States, by the authorities of Ecuador gave rise to a contention with that
Government, in which his right to be released or to have a speedy and
impartial trial on announced charges and with all guaranties of defense
stipulated by treaty was insisted upon by us. After an elaborate
correspondence and repeated and earnest representations on our part Mr.
Santos was, after an alleged trial and conviction, eventually included in a
general decree of amnesty and pardoned by the Ecuadorian Executive and
released, leaving the question of his American citizenship denied by the
Ecuadorian Government, but insisted upon by our own.

The amount adjudged by the late French and American Claims Commission to be
due from the United States to French claimants on account of injuries
suffered by them during the War of Secession, having been appropriated by
the last Congress, has been duly paid to the French Government.

The act of February 25, 1885, provided for a preliminary search of the
records of French prize courts for evidence bearing on the claims of
American citizens against France for spoliations committed prior to 1801.
The duty has been performed, and the report of the agent will be laid
before you.

I regret to say that the restrictions upon the importation of our pork into
France continue, notwithstanding the abundant demonstration of the absence
of sanitary danger in its use; but I entertain strong hopes that with a
better understanding of the matter this vexatious prohibition will be
removed. It would be pleasing to be able to say as much with respect to
Germany, Austria, and other countries, where such food products are
absolutely excluded, without present prospect of reasonable change.

The interpretation of our existing treaties of naturalization by Germany
during the past year has attracted attention by reason of an apparent
tendency on the part of the Imperial Government to extend the scope of the
residential restrictions to which returning naturalized citizens of German
origin are asserted to be liable under the laws of the Empire. The
temperate and just attitude taken by this Government with regard to this
class of questions will doubtless lead to a satisfactory understanding.

The dispute of Germany and Spain relative to the domination of the Caroline
Islands has attracted the attention of this Government by reason of
extensive interests of American citizens having grown up in those parts
during the past thirty years, and because the question of ownership
involves jurisdiction of matters affecting the status of our citizens under
civil and criminal law. While standing wholly aloof from the proprietary
issues raised between powers to both of which the United States are
friendly, this Government expects that nothing in the present contention
shall unfavorably affect our citizens carrying on a peaceful commerce or
there domiciled, and has so informed the Governments of Spain and Germany.

The marked good will between the United States and Great Britain has been
maintained during the past year.

The termination of the fishing clauses of the treaty of Washington, in
pursuance of the joint resolution of March 3, 1883, must have resulted in
the abrupt cessation on the 1st of July of this year, in the midst of their
ventures, of the operations of citizens of the United States engaged in
fishing in British American waters but for a diplomatic understanding
reached with Her Majesty's Government in June last, whereby assurance was
obtained that no interruption of those operations should take place during
the current fishing season.

In the interest of good neighborhood and of the commercial intercourse of
adjacent communities, the question of the North American fisheries is one
of much importance. Following out the intimation given by me when the
extensory arrangement above described was negotiated, I recommend that the
Congress provide for the appointment of a commission in which the
Governments of the United States and Great Britain shall be respectively
represented, charged with the consideration and settlement, upon a just,
equitable, and honorable basis, of the entire question of the fishing
rights of the two Governments and their respective citizens on the coasts
of the United States and British North America. The fishing interests being
intimately related to other general questions dependent upon contiguity and
intercourse, consideration thereof in all their equities might also
properly come within the purview of such a commission, and the fullest
latitude of expression on both sides should be permitted.

The correspondence in relation to the fishing rights will be submitted. The
arctic exploring steamer Alert, which was generously given by Her Majesty's
Government to aid in the relief of the Greely expedition, was, after the
successful attainment of that humane purpose, returned to Great Britain, in
pursuance of the authority conferred by the act of March 3, 1885.

The inadequacy of the existing engagements for extradition between the
United States and Great Britain has been long apparent. The tenth article
of the treaty of 1842, one of the earliest compacts in this regard entered
into by us, stipulated for surrender in respect of a limited number of
offenses. Other crimes no less inimical to the social welfare should be
embraced and the procedure of extradition brought in harmony with present
international practice. Negotiations with Her Majesty's Government for an
enlarged treaty of extradition have been pending since 1870, and I
entertain strong hopes that a satisfactory result may be soon attained.

The frontier line between Alaska and British Columbia, as defined by the
treaty of cession with Russia, follows the demarcation assigned in a prior
treaty between Great Britain and Russia. Modern exploration discloses that
this ancient boundary is impracticable as a geographical fact. In the
unsettled condition of that region the question has lacked importance, but
the discovery of mineral wealth in the territory the line is supposed to
traverse admonishes that the time has come when an accurate knowledge of
the boundary is needful to avert jurisdictional complications. I recommend,
therefore, that provision be made for a preliminary reconnoissance by
officers of the United States, to the end of acquiring more precise
information on the subject. I have invited Her Majesty's Government to
consider with us the adoption of a more convenient line, to be established
by meridian observations or by known geographical features without the
necessity of an expensive survey of the whole.

The late insurrectionary movements in Hayti having been quelled, the
Government of that Republic has made prompt provision for adjudicating the
losses suffered by foreigners because of hostilities there, and the claims
of certain citizens of the United States will be in this manner
determined.

The long-pending claims of two citizens of the United States, Pelletier and
Lazare, have been disposed of by arbitration, and an award in favor of each
claimant has been made, which by the terms of the engagement is final. It
remains for Congress to provide for the payment of the stipulated moiety of
the expenses.

A question arose with Hayti during the past year by reason of the
exceptional treatment of an American citizen, Mr. Van Bokkelen, a resident
of Port-au-Prince, who, on suit by creditors residing in the United States,
was sentenced to imprisonment, and, under the operation of a Haytian
statute, was denied relief secured to a native Haytian. This Government
asserted his treaty right to equal treatment with natives of Hayti in all
suits at law. Our contention was denied by the Haytian Government, which,
however, while still professing to maintain the ground taken against Mr.
Van Bokkelen's right, terminated the controversy by setting him at liberty
without explanation.

An international conference to consider the means of arresting the spread
of cholera and other epidemic diseases was held at Rome in May last, and
adjourned to meet again on further notice. An expert delegate on behalf of
the United States has attended its sessions and will submit a report.

Our relations with Mexico continue to be most cordial, as befits those of
neighbors between whom the strongest ties of friendship and commercial
intimacy exist, as the natural and growing consequence of our similarity of
institutions and geographical propinquity.

The relocation of the boundary line between the United States and Mexico
westward of the Rio Grande, under the convention of July 29, 1882, has been
unavoidably delayed, but I apprehend no difficulty in securing a
prolongation of the period for its accomplishment.

The lately concluded commercial treaty with Mexico still awaits the
stipulated legislation to carry its provisions into effect, for which one
year's additional time has been secured by a supplementary article signed
in February last and since ratified on both sides.

As this convention, so important to the commercial welfare of the two
adjoining countries, has been constitutionally confirmed by the treaty-
making branch, I express the hope that legislation needed to make it
effective may not be long delayed.

The large influx of capital and enterprise to Mexico from the United States
continues to aid in the development of the resources and in augmenting the
material well-being of our sister Republic. Lines of railway, penetrating
to the heart and capital of the country, bring the two peoples into
mutually beneficial intercourse, and enlarged facilities of transit add to
profitable commerce, create new markets, and furnish avenues to otherwise
isolated communities.

I have already adverted to the suggested construction of a ship railway
across the narrow formation of the territory of Mexico at Tehuantepec.

With the gradual recovery of Peru from the effects of her late disastrous
conflict with Chile, and with the restoration of civil authority in that
distracted country, it is hoped that pending war claims of our citizens
will be adjusted.

In conformity with notification given by the Government of Peru, the
existing treaties of commerce and extradition between the United States and
that country will terminate March 31, 1886.

Our good relationship with Russia continues.

An officer of the Navy, detailed for the purpose, is now on his way to
Siberia bearing the testimonials voted by Congress to those who generously
succored the survivors of the unfortunate Jeannette expedition.

It is gratifying to advert to the cordiality of our intercourse with
Spain.

The long-pending claim of the owners of the ship Masonic for loss suffered
through the admitted dereliction of the Spanish authorities in the
Philippine Islands has been adjusted by arbitration and an indemnity
awarded. The principle of arbitration in such cases, to which the United
States have long and consistently adhered, thus receives a fresh and
gratifying confirmation.

Other questions with Spain have been disposed of or are under diplomatic
consideration with a view to just and honorable settlement.

The operation of the commercial agreement with Spain of January 2--February
13, 1884, has been found inadequate to the commercial needs of the United
States and the Spanish Antilies, and the terms of the agreement are
subjected to conflicting interpretations in those islands.

Negotiations have been instituted at Madrid for a full treaty not open to
these objections and in the line of the general policy touching the
neighborly intercourse of proximate communities, to which I elsewhere
advert, and aiming, moreover, at the removal of existing burdens and
annoying restrictions; and although a satisfactory termination is promised,
I am compelled to delay its announcement.

An international copyright conference was held at Berne in September, on
the invitation of the Swiss Government. The envoy of the United States
attended as a delegate, but refrained from committing this Government to
the results, even by signing the recommendatory protocol adopted. The
interesting and important subject of international copyright has been
before you for several years. Action is certainly desirable to effect the
object in view; and while there may be question as to the relative
advantage of treating it by legislation or by specific treaty, the matured
views of the Berne conference can not fail to aid your consideration of the
subject.

The termination of the commercial treaty of 1862 between the United States
and Turkey has been sought by that Government. While there is question as
to the sufficiency of the notice of termination given, yet as the
commercial rights of our citizens in Turkey come under the favored-nation
guaranties of the prior treaty of 1830, and as equal treatment is admitted
by the Porte, no inconvenience can result from the assent of this
Government to the revision of the Ottoman tariffs, in which the treaty
powers have been invited to join.

Questions concerning our citizens in Turkey may be affected by the Porte's
nonacquiescence in the right of expatriation and by the imposition of
religious tests as a condition of residence, in which this Government can
not concur. The United States must hold in their intercourse with every
power that the status of their citizens is to be respected and equal civil
privileges accorded to them without regard to creed, and affected by no
considerations save those growing out of domiciliary return to the land of
original allegiance or of unfulfilled personal obligations which may
survive, under municipal laws, after such voluntary return.

The negotiation with Venezuela relative to the rehearing of the awards of
the mixed commission constituted under the treaty of 1866 was resumed in
view of the recent acquiescence of the Venezuelan envoy in the principal
point advanced by this Government, that the effects of the old treaty could
only be set aside by the operation of a new convention. A result in
substantial accord with the advisory suggestions contained in the joint
resolution of March 3, 1883, has been agreed upon and will shortly be
submitted to the Senate for ratification.

Under section 3659 of the Revised Statutes all funds held in trust by the
United States and the annual interest accruing thereon, when not otherwise
required by treaty, are to be invested in stocks of the United States
bearing a rate of interest not less than 5 per cent per annum. There being
now no procurable stocks paying so high a rate of interest, the letter of
the statute is at present inapplicable, but its spirit is subserved by
continuing to make investments of this nature in current stocks bearing the
highest interest now paid. The statute, however, makes no provision for the
disposal of such accretions. It being contrary to the general rule of this
Government to allow interest on claims, I recommend the repeal of the
provision in question and the disposition, under a uniform rule, of the
present accumulations from investment of trust funds.

The inadequacy of existing legislation touching citizenship and
naturalization demands your consideration.

While recognizing the right of expatriation, no statutory provision exists
providing means for renouncing citizenship by an American citizen, native
born or naturalized, nor for terminating and vacating an improper
acquisition of citizenship. Even a fraudulent decree of naturalization can
not now be canceled. The privilege and franchise of American citizenship
should be granted with care, and extended to those only who intend in good
faith to assume its duties and responsibilities when attaining its
privileges and benefits. It should be withheld from those who merely go
through the forms of naturalization with the intent of escaping the duties
of their original allegiance without taking upon themselves those of their
new status, or who may acquire the rights of American citizenship for no
other than a hostile purpose toward their original governments. These evils
have had many flagrant illustrations.

I regard with favor the suggestion put forth by one of my predecessors that
provision be made for a central bureau of record of the decrees of
naturalization granted by the various courts throughout the United States
now invested with that power.

The rights which spring from domicile in the United States, especially when
coupled with a declaration of intention to become a citizen, are worthy of
definition by statute. The stranger coming hither with intent to remain,
establishing his residence in our midst, contributing to the general
welfare, and by his voluntary act declaring his purpose to assume the
responsibilities of citizenship, thereby gains an inchoate status which
legislation may properly define. The laws of certain States and Territories
admit a domiciled alien to the local franchise, conferring on him the
rights of citizenship to a degree which places him in the anomalous
position of being a citizen of a State and yet not of the United States
within the purview of Federal and international law.

It is important within the scope of national legislation to define this
right of alien domicile as distinguished from Federal naturalization.

The commercial relations of the United States with their immediate
neighbors and with important areas of traffic near our shores suggest
especially liberal intercourse between them and us.

Following the treaty of 1883 with Mexico, which rested on the basis of a
reciprocal exemption from customs duties, other similar treaties were
initiated by my predecessor.

Recognizing the need of less obstructed traffic with Cuba and Puerto Rico,
and met by the desire of Spain to succor languishing interests in the
Antilles, steps were taken to attain those ends by a treaty of commerce. A
similar treaty was afterwards signed by the Dominican Republic.
Subsequently overtures were made by Her Britannic Majesty's Government for
a like mutual extension of commercial intercourse with the British West
Indian and South American dependencies, but without result.

On taking office I withdrew for reexamination the treaties signed with
Spain and Santo Domingo, then pending before the Senate. The result has
been to satisfy me of the inexpediency of entering into engagements of this
character not covering the entire traffic.

These treaties contemplated the surrender by the United States of large
revenues for inadequate considerations. Upon sugar alone duties were
surrendered to an amount far exceeding all the advantages offered in
exchange. Even were it intended to relieve our consumers, it was evident
that so long as the exemption but partially covered our importation such
relief would be illusory. To relinquish a revenue so essential seemed
highly improvident at a time when new and large drains upon the Treasury
were contemplated. Moreover, embarrassing questions would have arisen under
the favored-nation clauses of treaties with other nations.

As a further objection, it is evident that tariff regulation by treaty
diminishes that independent control over its own revenues which is
essential for the safety and welfare of any government. Emergency calling
for an increase of taxation may at any time arise, and no engagement with a
foreign power should exist to hamper the action of the Government.

By the fourteenth section of the shipping act approved June 26, 1884,
certain reductions and contingent exemptions from tonnage dues were made as
to vessels entering ports of the United States from any foreign port in
North and Central America, the West India Islands, the Bahamas and
Bermudas, Mexico, and the Isthmus as far as Aspinwall and Panama. The
Governments of Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Portugal, and Sweden and Norway
have asserted, under the favored-nation clause in their treaties with the
United States, a claim to like treatment in respect of vessels coming to
the United States from their home ports. This Government, however, holds
that the privileges granted by the act are purely geographical, inuring to
any vessel of any foreign power that may choose to engage in traffic
between this country and any port within the defined zone, and no warrant
exists under the most-favored-nation clause for the extension of the
privileges in question to vessels sailing to this country from ports
outside the limitation of the act.

Undoubtedly the relations of commerce with our near neighbors, whose
territories form so long a frontier line difficult to be guarded, and who
find in our country, and equally offer to us, natural markets, demand
special and considerate treatment. It rests with Congress to consider what
legislative action may increase facilities of intercourse which contiguity
makes natural and desirable.

I earnestly urge that Congress recast the appropriations for the
maintenance of the diplomatic and consular service on a footing
commensurate with the importance of our national interests. At every post
where a representative is necessary the salary should be so graded as to
permit him to live with comfort. With the assignment of adequate salaries
the so-called notarial extra official fees, which our officers abroad are
now permitted to treat as personal perquisites, should be done away with.
Every act requiring the certification and seal of the officer should be
taxable at schedule rates and the fee therefor returned to the Treasury. By
restoring these revenues to the public use the consular service would be
self-supporting, even with a liberal increase of the present low salaries.

In further prevention of abuses a system of consular inspection should be
instituted.

The appointment of a limited number of secretaries of legation at large, to
be assigned to duty wherever necessary, and in particular for temporary
service at missions which for any cause may be without a head, should also
be authorized.

I favor also authorization for the detail of officers of the regular
service as military or naval attaches at legations.

Some foreign governments do not recognize the union of consular with
diplomatic functions. Italy and Venezuela will only receive the appointee
in one of his two capacities, but this does not prevent the requirement of
a bond and submission to the responsibilities of an office whose duties he
can not discharge. The superadded title of consul-general should be
abandoned at all missions.

I deem it expedient that a well-devised measure for the reorganization of
the extraterritorial courts in Oriental countries should replace the
present system, which labors under the disadvantage of combining judicial
and executive functions in the same office.

In several Oriental countries generous offers have been made of premises
for housing the legations of the United States. A grant of land for that
purpose was made some years since by Japan, and has been referred to in the
annual messages of my predecessor. The Siamese Government has made a gift
to the United States of commodious quarters in Bangkok. In Korea the late
minister was permitted to purchase a building from the Government for
legation use. In China the premises rented for the legation are favored as
to local charges. At Tangier the house occupied by our representative has
been for many years the property; this Government, having been given for
that purpose in 1822 by the Sultan of Morocco. I approve the suggestion
heretofore made, that, view of the conditions of life and administration in
the Eastern countries, the legation buildings in China, Japan, Korea, Siam,
and perhaps Persia, should be owned and furnished by the Government with a
view to permanency and security. To this end I recommend that authority be
given to accept the gifts adverted to in Japan and Siam, and to purchase in
the other countries named, with provision for furniture and repairs. A
considerable saving in rentals would result.

The World's Industrial Exposition, held at New Orleans last winter, with
the assistance of the Federal Government, attracted a large number of
foreign exhibits, and proved of great value in spreading among the
concourse of visitors from Mexico and Central and South America a wider
knowledge of the varied manufactures and productions of this country and
their availability in exchange for the productions of those regions.

Past Congresses have had under consideration the advisability of abolishing
the discrimination made by the tariff laws in favor of the works of
American artists. The odium of the policy which subjects to a high rate of
duty the paintings of foreign artists and exempts the productions of
American artists residing abroad, and who receive gratuitously advantages
and instruction, is visited upon our citizens engaged in art culture in
Europe, and has caused them with practical unanimity to favor the abolition
of such an ungracious distinction; and in their interest, and for other
obvious reasons, I strongly recommend it.

The report of the Secretary of the Treasury fully exhibits the condition of
the public finances and of the several branches of the Government connected
with his Department. The suggestions of the Secretary relating to the
practical operations of this important Department, and his recommendations
in the direction of simplification and economy, particularly in the work of
collecting customs duties, are especially urged upon the attention of
Congress.

The ordinary receipts from all sources for the fiscal year ended June 30,
1885, were $322,690,706.38. Of this sum $181,471,939.34 was received from
customs and $112,498,725.54 from internal revenue. The total receipts, as
given above, were $24,829,163.54 less than those for the year ended June
30, 1884. This diminution embraces a falling off of $13,595,550.42 in the
receipts from customs and $9,687,346.97 in the receipts from internal
revenue.

The total ordinary expenditures of the Government for the fiscal year were
$260,226,935.50, leaving a surplus in the Treasury at the close of the year
of $63,463,771.27. This is $40,929,854.32 less than the surplus reported at
the close of the previous year.

The expenditures are classified as follows:

The amount paid on the public debt during the fiscal year ended June 30,
1885, was $45,993,235.43, and there has been paid since that date and up to
November 1, 1885, the sum of $369,828, leaving the amount of the debt at
the last-named date $1,514,475,860.47. There was however, at that time in
the Treasury, applicable to the general purposes of the Government, the sum
of $66,818,292.38.

The total receipts for the current fiscal year ending June 30, 1886,
ascertained to October 1, 1885, and estimated for the remainder of the
year, are $315,000,000. The expenditures ascertained and estimated for the
same time are $245,000,000, leaving a surplus at the close of the year
estimated at $70,000,000.

The value of the exports from the United States to foreign countries during
the last fiscal year was as follows:

Some of the principal exports, with their values and the percentage they
respectively bear to the total exportation, are given as follows:

Our imports during the year were as follows:

The following are given as prominent articles of import during the year,
with their values and the percentage they bear to the total importation:

Of the entire amount of duties collected 70 per cent was collected from the
following articles of import:

The fact that our revenues are in excess of the actual needs of all
economical administration of the Government justifies a reduction in the
amount exacted from the people for its support. Our Government is but the
means established by the will of a free people by which certain principles
are applied which they have adopted for their benefit and protection; and
it is never better administered and its true spirit is never better
observed than when the people's taxation for its support is scrupulously
limited to the actual necessity of expenditure and distributed according to
a just and equitable plan.

The proposition with which we have to deal is the reduction of the revenue
received by the Government, and indirectly paid by the people, from customs
duties. The question of free trade is not involved, nor is there now any
occasion for the general discussion of the wisdom or expediency of a
protective system.

Justice and fairness dictate that in any modification of our present laws
relating to revenue the industries and interests which have been encouraged
by such laws, and in which our citizens have large investments, should not
be ruthlessly injured or destroyed. We should also deal with the subject in
such manner as to protect the interests of American labor, which is the
capital of our workingmen. Its stability and proper remuneration furnish
the most justifiable pretext for a protective policy.

Within these limitations a certain reduction should be made in our customs
revenue. The amount of such reduction having been determined, the inquiry
follows, Where can it best be remitted and what articles can best be
released from duty in the interest of our citizens?

I think the reduction should be made in the revenue derived from a tax upon
the imported necessaries of life. We thus directly lessen the cost of
living in every family of the land and release to the people in every
humble home a larger measure of the rewards of frugal industry.

During the year ended November 1, 1885, 145 national banks were organized,
with an aggregate capital of $16,938,000, and circulating notes have been
issued to them amounting to $4,274,910. The whole number of these banks in
existence on the day above mentioned was 2,727.

The very limited amount of circulating notes issued by our national banks,
compared with the amount the law permits them to issue upon a deposit of
bonds for their redemption, indicates that the volume of our circulating
medium may be largely increased through this instrumentality.

Nothing more important than the present condition of our currency and
coinage can claim your attention.

Since February, 1878, the Government has, under the compulsory provisions
of law, purchased silver bullion and coined the same at the rate of more
than $2,000,000 every month. By this process up to the present date
215,759,431 silver dollars have been coined.

A reasonable appreciation of a delegation of power to the General
Government would limit its exercise, without express restrictive words, to
the people's needs and the requirements of the public welfare.

Upon this theory the authority to "coin money" given to Congress by the
Constitution, if it permits the purchase by the Government of bullion for
coinage in any event, does not justify such purchase and coinage to an
extent beyond the amount needed for a sufficient circulating medium.

The desire to utilize the silver product of the country should not lead to
a misuse or the perversion of this power.

The necessity for such an addition to the silver currency of the nation as
is compelled by the silver-coinage act is negatived by the fact that up to
the present time only about 50,000,000 of the silver dollars so coined have
actually found their way into circulation, leaving more than 165,000,000 in
the possession of the Government, the custody of which has entailed a
considerable expense for the construction of vaults for it deposit. Against
this latter amount there are outstanding silver certificates amounting to
about $93,000,000.

Every month two millions of gold in the public Treasury are paid our for
two millions or more of silver dollars, to be added to the idle mass
already accumulated.

If continued long enough, this operation will result in the substitution of
silver for all the gold the Government owns applicable to its general
purposes. It will not do to rely upon the customs receipts of the
Government to make good this drain of gold, because the silver thus coined
having been made legal tender for all debts and dues, public and private,
at times during the last six months 58 per cent of the receipts for duties
has been in silver or silver certificates, while the average within that
period has been 20 per cent. The proportion of silver and its certificates
received by the Government will probably increase as time goes on, for the
reason that the nearer the period approaches when it will be obliged to
offer silver in payment of its obligations the greater inducement there
will be to hoard gold against depreciation in the value of silver or for
the purpose of speculating.

This hoarding of gold has already begun.

When the time comes that gold has been withdrawn from circulation, then
will be apparent the difference between the real value of the silver dollar
and a dollar in gold, and the two coins will part company. Gold, still the
standard of value and necessary in our dealings with other countries, will
be at a premium over silver; banks which have substituted gold for the
deposits of their customers may pay them with silver bought with such gold,
thus making a handsome profit; rich speculators will sell their hoarded
gold to their neighbors who need it to liquidate their foreign debts, at a
ruinous premium over silver, and the laboring men and women of the land,
most defenseless of all, will find that the dollar received for the wage of
their toil has sadly shrunk in its purchasing power. It may be said that
the latter result will be but temporary, and that ultimately the price of
labor will be adjusted to the change; but even if this takes place the
wage-worker can not possibly gain, but must inevitably lose, since the
price he is compelled to pay for his living will not only be measured in a
coin heavily depreciated and fluctuating and uncertain in its value, but
this uncertainty in the value of the purchasing medium will be made the
pretext for an advance in prices beyond that justified by actual
depreciation.

The words uttered in 1834 by Daniel Webster in the Senate of the United
States are true to-day: The very man of all others who has the deepest
interest in a sound currency, and who suffers most by mischievous
legislation in money matters, is the man who earns his daily bread by his
daily toil. The most distinguished advocate of bimetallism, discussing our
silver coinage, has lately written: No American citizen's hand has yet felt
the sensation of cheapness, either in receiving or expending the silver-act
dollars. And those who live by labor or legitimate trade never will feel
that sensation of cheapness. However plenty silver dollars may become, they
will not be distributed as gifts among the people; and if the laboring man
should receive four depreciated dollars where he now receives but two, he
will pay in the depreciated coin more than double the price he now pays for
all the necessaries and comforts of life.

Those who do not fear any disastrous consequences arising from the
continued compulsory coinage of silver as now directed by law, and who
suppose that the addition to the currency of the country intended as its
result will be a public benefit, are reminded that history demonstrates
that the point is easily reached in the attempt to float at the same time
two sorts of money of different excellence when the better will cease to be
in general circulation. The hoarding of gold which has already taken place
indicates that we shall not escape the usual experience in such cases. So
if this silver coinage be continued we may reasonably expect that gold and
its equivalent will abandon the field of circulation to silver alone. This
of course must produce a severe contraction of our circulating medium,
instead of adding to it.

It will not be disputed that any attempt on the part of the Government to
cause the circulation of silver dollars worth 80 cents side by side with
gold dollars worth 100 cents, even within the limit that legislation does
not run counter to the laws of trade, to be successful must be seconded by
the confidence of the people that both coins will retain the same
purchasing power and be interchangeable at will. A special effort has been
made by the Secretary of the Treasury to increase the amount of our silver
coin in circulation; but the fact that a large share of the limited amount
thus put out has soon returned to the public Treasury in payment of duties
leads to the belief that the people do not now desire to keep it in hand,
and this, with the evident disposition to hoard gold, gives rise to the
suspicion that there already exists a lack of confidence among the people
touching our financial processes. There is certainly not enough silver now
in circulation to cause uneasiness, and the whole amount coined and now on
hand might after a time be absorbed by the people without apprehension; but
it is the ceaseless stream that threatens to overflow the land which causes
fear and uncertainty.

What has been thus far submitted upon this subject relates almost entirely
to considerations of a home nature, unconnected with the bearing which the
policies of other nations have upon the question. But it is perfectly
apparent that a line of action in regard to our currency can not wisely be
settled upon or persisted in without considering the attitude on the
subject of other countries with whom we maintain intercourse through
commerce, trade, and travel. An acknowledgment of this fact is found in the
act by virtue of which our silver is compulsorily coined. It provides
that--The President shall invite the governments of the countries
composing the Latin Union, so called, and of such other European nations as
he may deem advisable, to join the United States in a conference to adopt a
common ratio between gold and silver for the purpose of establishing
internationally the use of bimetallic money and securing fixity of relative
value between those metals. This conference absolutely failed, and a
similar fate has awaited all subsequent efforts in the same direction. And
still we continue our coinage of silver at a ratio different from that of
any other nation. The most vital part of the silver-coinage act remains
inoperative and unexecuted, and without an ally or friend we battle upon
the silver field in an illogical and losing contest.

To give full effect to the design of Congress on this subject I have made
careful and earnest endeavor since the adjournment of the last Congress.

To this end I delegated a gentleman well instructed in fiscal science to
proceed to the financial centers of Europe and, in conjunction with our
ministers to England, France, and Germany, to obtain a full knowledge of
the attitude and intent of those governments in respect of the
establishment of such an international ratio as would procure free coinage
of both metals at the mints of those countries and our own. By my direction
our consul-general at Paris has given close attention to the proceedings of
the congress of the Latin Union, in order to indicate our interest in its
objects and report its action.

It may be said in brief, as the result of these efforts, that the attitude
of the leading powers remains substantially unchanged since the monetary
conference of 1881, nor is it to be questioned that the views of these
governments are in each instance supported by the weight of public
opinion.

The steps thus taken have therefore only more fully demonstrated the
uselessness of further attempts at present to arrive at any agreement on
the subject with other nations.

In the meantime we are accumulating silver coin, based upon our own
peculiar ratio, to such an extent, and assuming so heavy a burden to be
provided for in any international negotiations, as will render us an
undesirable party to any future monetary conference of nations.

It is a significant fact that four of the five countries composing the
Latin Union mentioned in our coinage act, embarrassed with their silver
currency, have just completed an agreement among themselves that no more
silver shall be coined by their respective Governments and that such as has
been already coined and in circulation shall be redeemed in gold by the
country of its coinage. The resort to this expedient by these countries may
well arrest the attention of those who suppose that we can succeed without
shock or injury in the attempt to circulate upon its merits all the silver
we may coin under the provisions of our silver-coinage act.

The condition in which our Treasury may be placed by a persistence in our
present course is a matter of concern to every patriotic citizen who does
not desire his Government to pay in silver such of its obligations as
should be paid in gold. Nor should our condition be such as to oblige us,
in a prudent management of our affairs, to discontinue the calling in and
payment of interest-bearing obligations which we have the right now to
discharge, and thus avoid the payment of further interest thereon.

The so-called debtor class, for whose benefit the continued compulsory
coinage of silver is insisted upon, are not dishonest because they are in
debt, and they should not be suspected of a desire to jeopardize the
financial safety of the country in order that they may cancel their present
debts by paying the same in depreciated dollars. Nor should it be forgotten
that it is not the rich nor the money lender alone that must submit to such
a readjustment, enforced by the Government and their debtors. The pittance
of the widow and the orphan and the incomes of helpless beneficiaries of
all kinds would be disastrously reduced. The depositors in savings banks
and in other institutions which hold in trust the savings of the poor, when
their little accumulations are scaled down to meet the new order of things,
would in their distress painfully realize the delusion of the promise made
to them that plentiful money would improve their condition.

We have now on hand all the silver dollars necessary to supply the present
needs of the people and to satisfy those who from sentiment wish to see
them in circulation, and if their coinage is suspended they can be readily
obtained by all who desire them. If the need of more is at anytime
apparent, their coinage may be renewed.

That disaster has not already overtaken us furnishes no proof that danger
does not wait upon a continuation of the present silver coinage. We have
been saved by the most careful management and unusual expedients, by a
combination of fortunate conditions, and by a confident expectation that
the course of the Government in regard to silver coinage would be speedily
changed by the action of Congress.

Prosperity hesitates upon our threshold because of the dangers and
uncertainties surrounding this question. Capital timidly shrinks from
trade, and investors are unwilling to take the chance of the questionable
shape in which their money will be returned to them, while enterprise halts
at a risk against which care and sagacious management do not protect.

As a necessary consequence, labor lacks employment and suffering and
distress are visited upon a portion of our fellow-citizens especially
entitled to the careful consideration of those charged with the duties of
legislation. No interest appeals to us so strongly for a safe and stable
currency as the vast army of the unemployed.

I recommend the suspension of the compulsory coinage of silver dollars,
directed by the law passed in February, 1878.

The Steamboat-Inspection Service on the 30th day of June, 1885, was
composed of 140 persons, including officers, clerks, and messengers. The
expenses of the service over the receipts were $138,822.22 during the
fiscal year. The special inspection of foreign steam vessels, organized
under a law passed in 1882, was maintained during the year at an expense of
$36,641.63. Since the close of the fiscal year reductions have been made in
the force employed which will result in a saving during the current year of
$17,000 without affecting the efficiency of the service.

The Supervising Surgeon-General reports that during the fiscal year 41,714
patients have received relief through the Marine-Hospital Service, of whom
12,803 were treated in hospitals and 28,911 at the dispensaries.

Active and effective efforts have been made through the medium of this
service to protect the country against an invasion of cholera, which has
prevailed in Spain and France, and the smallpox, which recently broke out
in Canada.

The most gratifying results have attended the operations of the Life Saving
Service during the last fiscal year. The observance of the provision of law
requiring the appointment of the force employed in this service to be made
"solely with reference to their fitness, and without reference to their
political or party affiliation," has secured the result which may
confidently be expected in any branch of public employment where such a
rule is applied. As a consequence, this service is composed of men well
qualified for the performance of their dangerous and exceptionally
important duties.

The number of stations in commission at the close of the year was 203. The
number of disasters to vessels and craft of all kinds within their field of
action was 371. The number of persons endangered in such disasters was
2,439, of whom 2,428 were saved and only 11 lost. Other lives which were
imperiled, though not by disasters to shipping, were also rescued, and a
large amount of property was saved through the aid of this service. The
cost of its maintenance during the year was $828,474.43.

The work of the Coast and Geodetic Survey was during the last fiscal year
carried on within the boundaries and off the coasts of thirty-two States,
two Territories, and the District of Columbia. In July last certain
irregularities were found to exist in the management of this Bureau, which
led to a prompt investigation of its methods. The abuses which were brought
to light by this examination and the reckless disregard of duty and the
interests of the Government developed on the part of some of those
connected with the service made a change of superintendency and a few of
its other officers necessary. Since the Bureau has been in new hands an
introduction of economies and the application of business methods have
produced an important saving to the Government and a promise of more useful
results.

This service has never been regulated by anything but the most indefinite
legal enactments and the most unsatisfactory rules. It was many years ago
sanctioned apparently for a purpose regarded as temporary and related to a
survey of our coast. Having gained a place in the appropriations made by
Congress, it has gradually taken to itself powers and objects not
contemplated in its creation and extended its operations until it sadly
needs legislative attention.

So far as a further survey of our coast is concerned, there seems to be a
propriety in transferring that work to the Navy Department. The other
duties now in charge of this establishment, if they can not be profitably
attached to some existing Department or other bureau, should be prosecuted
under a law exactly defining their scope and purpose, and with a careful
discrimination between the scientific inquiries which may properly be
assumed by the Government and those which should be undertaken by State
authority or by individual enterprise.

It is hoped that the report of the Congressional committee heretofore
appointed to investigate this and other like matters will aid in the
accomplishment of proper legislation on this subject.

The report of the Secretary of War is herewith submitted. The attention of
Congress is invited to the detailed account which it contains of the
administration of his Department, and his recommendations and suggestions
for the improvement of the service.

The Army consisted, at the date of the last consolidated returns, of 2,154
officers and 24,705 enlisted men.

The expenses of the Departments for the fiscal year ended June, 30, 1885,
including $13,164,394.60 for public works and river and harbor
improvements, were $45,850,999.54.

Besides the troops which were dispatched in pursuit of the small band of
Indians who left their reservation in Arizona and committed murders and
outrages, two regiments of cavalry and one of infantry were sent last July
to the Indian Territory to prevent an outbreak which seemed imminent. They
remained to aid, if necessary, in the expulsion of intruders upon the
reservation, who seemed to have caused the discontent among the Indians,
but the Executive proclamation warning them to remove was complied with
without their interference.

Troops were also sent to Rock Springs, in Wyoming Territory, after the
massacre of Chinese there, to prevent further disturbance, and afterwards
to Seattle, in Washington Territory, to avert a threatened attack upon
Chinese laborers and domestic violence there. In both cases the mere
presence of the troops had the desired effect.

It appears that the number of desertions has diminished, but that during
the last fiscal year they numbered 2,927; and one instance is given by the
Lieutenant-General of six desertions by the same recruit. I am convinced
that this number of desertions can be much diminished by better discipline
and treatment; but the punishment should be increased for repeated
offenses.

These desertions might also be reduced by lessening the term of first
enlistments, thus allowing a discontented recruit to contemplate a nearer
discharge and the Army a profitable riddance. After one term of service a
reenlistment would be quite apt to secure a contented recruit and a good
soldier.

The Acting Judge-Advocate-General reports that the number of trials by
general courts-martial during the year was 2,328, and that 11,851 trials
took place before garrison and regimental courts-martial. The suggestion
that probably more than half the Army have been tried for offenses, great
and small, in one year may well arrest attention. Of course many of these
trials before garrison and regimental courts-martial were for offenses
almost frivolous, and there should, I think, be a way devised to dispose of
these in a more summary and less inconvenient manner than by
court-martial.

If some of the proceedings of courts-martial which I have had occasion to
examine present the ideas of justice which generally prevail in these
tribunals, I am satisfied that they should be much reformed if the honor
and the honesty of the Army and Navy are by their instrumentality to be
vindicated and protected.

The Board on Fortifications or other defenses, appointed in pursuance of
the provisions of the act of Congress approved March 3, 1885, will in a
short time present their report, and it is hoped that this may greatly aid
the legislation so necessary to remedy the present defenseless condition of
our seacoasts.

The work of the Signal Service has been prosecuted during the last year
with results of increasing benefit to the country. The field of instruction
has been enlarged with a view of adding to its usefulness. The number of
stations in operation June 30, 1885, was 489. Telegraphic reports are
received daily from 160 stations. Reports are also received from 25
Canadian stations, 375 volunteer observers, 52 army surgeons at military
posts, and 333 foreign stations. The expense of the service during the
fiscal year, after deducting receipts from military telegraph lines, was
$792,592.97. In view of the fact referred to by the Secretary of War, that
the work of this service ordinarily is of a scientific nature, and the
further fact that it is assuming larger proportions constantly and becoming
more and more unsuited to the fixed rules which must govern the Army, I am
inclined to agree with him in the opinion that it should be separately
established. If this is done, the scope and extent of its operations
should, as nearly as possible, be definitely prescribed by law and always
capable of exact ascertainment.

The Military Academy at West Point is reported as being in a high state of
efficiency and well equipped for the satisfactory accomplishment of the
purposes of its maintenance.

The fact that the class which graduates next year is an unusually large one
has constrained me to decline to make appointments to second lieutenancies
in the Army from civil life, so that such vacancies as exist in these
places may be reserved for such graduates; and yet it is not probable that
there will be enough vacancies to provide positions for them all when they
leave the military school. Under the prevailing law and usage those not
thus assigned to duty never actively enter the military service. It is
suggested that the law on this subject be changed so that such of these
young men as are not at once assigned to duty after graduation may be
retained as second lieutenants in the Army if they desire it, subject to
assignment when opportunity occurs, and under proper rules as to priority
of selection.

The expenditures on account of the Military Academy for the last fiscal
year, exclusive of the sum taken for its purposes from appropriations for
the support of the Army, were $290,712.07.

The act approved March 3, 1885, designed to compensate officers and
enlisted men for loss of private property while in the service of the
United States, is so indefinite in its terms and apparently admits so many
claims the adjustment of which could not have been contemplated that if it
is to remain upon the statute book it needs amendment.

There should be a general law of Congress prohibiting the construction of
bridges over navigable waters in such manner as to obstruct navigation,
with provisions for preventing the same. It seems that under existing
statutes the Government can not intervene to prevent such a construction
when entered upon without its consent, though when such consent is asked
and granted upon condition the authority to insist upon such condition is
clear. Thus it is represented that while the officers of the Government are
with great care guarding against the obstruction of navigation by a bridge
across the Mississippi River at St. Paul a large pier for a bridge has been
built just below this place directly in the navigable channel of the river.
If such things are to be permitted, a strong argument is presented against
the appropriation of large sums of money to improve the navigation of this
and other important highways of commerce.

The report of the Secretary of the Navy gives a history of the operations
of his Department and the present condition of the work committed to his
charge.

He details in full the course pursued by him to protect the rights of the
Government in respect of certain vessels unfinished at the time of his
accession to office, and also concerning the dispatch boat Dolphin, claimed
to be completed and awaiting the acceptance of the Department. No one can
fail to see from recitals contained in this report that only the
application of business principles has been insisted upon in the treatment
of these subjects, and that whatever controversy has arisen was caused by
the exaction on the part of the Department of contract obligations as they
were legally construed. In the case of the Dolphin, with entire justice to
the contractor, an agreement has been entered into providing for the
ascertainment by a judicial inquiry of the complete or partial compliance
with the contract in her construction, and further providing for the
assessment of any damages to which the Government may be entitled on
account of a partial failure to perform such contract, or the payment of
the sum still remaining unpaid upon her price in case a full performance is
adjudged.

The contractor, by reason of his failure in business, being unable to
complete the other three vessels, they were taken possession of by the
Government in their unfinished state under a clause in the contract
permitting such a course, and are now in process of completion in the yard
of the contractor, but under the supervision of the Navy Department.

Congress at its last session authorized the construction of two additional
new cruisers and two gunboats, at a cost not exceeding in the aggregate
$2,995,000. The appropriation for this purpose having become available on
the 1st day of July last, steps were at once taken for the procurement of
such plans for the construction of these vessels as would be likely to
insure their usefulness when completed. These are of the utmost importance,
considering the constant advance in the art of building vessels of this
character, and the time is not lost which is spent in their careful
consideration and selection.

All must admit the importance of an effective navy to a nation like ours,
having such an extended seacoast to protect; and yet we have not a single
vessel of war that could keep the seas against a first-class vessel of any
important power. Such a condition ought not longer to continue. The nation
that can not resist aggression is constantly exposed to it. Its foreign
policy is of necessity weak and its negotiations are conducted with
disadvantage because it is not in condition to enforce the terms dictated
by its sense of right and justice.

Inspired, as I am, by the hope, shared by all patriotic citizens, that the
day is not very far distant when our Navy will be such as befits our
standing among the nations of the earth, and rejoiced at every step that
leads in the direction of such a consummation, I deem it my duty to
especially direct the attention of Congress to the close of the report of
the Secretary of the Navy, in which the humiliating weakness of the present
organization of his Department is exhibited and the startling abuses and
waste of its present methods are exposed. The conviction is forced upon us
with the certainty of mathematical demonstration that before we proceed
further in the restoration of a Navy we need a thoroughly reorganized Navy
Department. The fact that within seventeen years more than $75,000,000 have
been spent in the construction, repair, equipment, and armament of vessels,
and the further fact that instead of an effective and creditable fleet we
have only the discontent and apprehension of a nation undefended by war
vessels, added to the disclosures now made, do not permit us to doubt that
every attempt to revive our Navy has thus far for the most part been
misdirected, and all our efforts in that direction have been little better
than blind gropings and expensive, aimless follies.

Unquestionably if we are content with the maintenance of a Navy Department
simply as a shabby ornament to the Government, a constant watchfulness may
prevent some of the scandal and abuse which have found their way into our
present organization, and its incurable waste may be reduced to the
minimum. But if we desire to build ships for present usefulness instead of
naval reminders of the days that are past, we must have a Department
organized for the work, supplied with all the talent and ingenuity our
country affords, prepared to take advantage of the experience of other
nations, systematized so that all effort shall unite and lead in one
direction, and fully imbued with the conviction that war vessels, though
new, are useless unless they combine all that the ingenuity of man has up
to this day brought forth relating to their construction.

I earnestly commend the portion of the Secretary's report devoted to this
subject to the attention of Congress, in the hope that his suggestions
touching the reorganization of his Department may be adopted as the first
step toward the reconstruction of our Navy.

The affairs of the postal service are exhibited by the report of the
Postmaster-General, which will be laid before you.

The postal revenue, whose ratio of gain upon the rising prosperity of 1882
and 1883 outstripped the increasing expenses of our growing service, was
checked by the reduction in the rate of letter postage which took effect
with the beginning of October in the latter year, and it diminished during
the two past fiscal years $2,790,000, in about the proportion of $2,270,000
in 1884 to $520,000 in 1885. Natural growth and development have meantime
increased expenditure, resulting in a deficiency in the revenue to meet the
expenses of the Department of five and a quarter million dollars for the
year 1884 and eight and a third million in the last fiscal year. The
anticipated and natural revival of the revenue has been oppressed and
retarded by the unfavorable business condition of the country, of which the
postal service is a faithful indicator. The gratifying fact is shown,
however, by the report that our returning prosperity is marked by a gain of
$380,000 in the revenue of the latter half of the last year over the
corresponding period of the preceding year.

The change in the weight of first-class matter which may be carried for a
single rate of postage from a half ounce to an ounce, and the reduction by
one-half of the rate of newspaper postage, which, under recent legislation,
began with the current year, will operate to restrain the augmentation of
receipts which otherwise might have been expected to such a degree that the
scale of expense may gain upon the revenue and cause an increased
deficiency to be shown at its close. Yet, after no long period of
reawakened prosperity, by proper economy it is confidently anticipated that
even the present low rates, now as favorable as any country affords, will
be adequate to sustain the cost of the service.

The operation of the Post-Office Department is for the convenience and
benefit of the people, and the method by which they pay the charges of this
useful arm of their public service, so that it be just and impartial, is of
less importance to them than the economical expenditure of the means they
provide for its maintenance and the due improvement of its agencies, so
that they may enjoy its highest usefulness.

A proper attention has been directed to the prevention of waste or
extravagance, and good results appear from the report to have already been
accomplished.

I approve the recommendation of the Postmaster-General to reduce the
charges on domestic money orders of $5 and less from 8 to 5 cents. This
change will materially aid those of our people who most of all avail
themselves of this instrumentality, but to whom the element of cheapness is
of the greatest importance. With this reduction the system would still
remain self-supporting.

The free-delivery system has been extended to 19 additional cities during
the year, and 178 now enjoy its conveniences. Experience has commended it
to those who enjoy its benefits, and further enlargement of its facilities
is due to other communities to which it is adapted. In the cities where it
has been established, taken together the local postage exceeds its
maintenance by nearly $1,300,000. The limit to which this system is now
confined by law has been nearly reached, and the reasons given justify its
extension, which is proposed.

It was decided, with my approbation, after a sufficient examination, to be
inexpedient for the Post-Office Department to contract for carrying our
foreign mails under the additional authority given by the last Congress.
The amount limited was inadequate to pay all within the purview of the law
the full rate of 50 cents per mile, and it would have been unjust and
unwise to have given it to some and denied it to others. Nor could
contracts have been let under the law to all at a rate to have brought the
aggregate within the appropriation without such practical prearrangement of
terms as would have violated it.

The rate of sea and inland postage which was proffered under another
statute clearly appears to be a fair compensation for the desired service,
being three times the price necessary to secure transportation by other
vessels upon any route, and much beyond the charges made to private persons
for services not less burdensome.

Some of the steamship companies, upon the refusal of the Postmaster-General
to attempt, by the means provided, the distribution of the sum appropriated
as an extra compensation, withdrew the services of their vessels and
thereby occasioned slight inconvenience, though no considerable injury, the
mails having been dispatched by other means.

Whatever may be thought of the policy of subsidizing any line of public
conveyance or travel, I am satisfied that it should not be done under cover
of an expenditure incident to the administration of a Department, nor
should there be any uncertainty as to the recipients of the subsidy or any
discretion left to an executive officer as to its distribution. If such
gifts of the public money are to be made for the purpose of aiding any
enterprise in the supposed interest of the public, I can not but think that
the amount to be paid and the beneficiary might better be determined by
Congress than in any other way.

The international congress of delegates from the Postal Union countries
convened at Lisbon, in Portugal, in February last, and after a session of
some weeks the delegates signed a convention amendatory of the present
postal-union convention in some particulars designed to advance its
purposes. This additional act has had my approval and will be laid before
you with the departmental report.

I approve the recommendation of the postmaster-General that another
assistant be provided for his Department. I invite your consideration to
the several other recommendations contained in his report.

The report of the Attorney-General contains a history of the conduct of the
Department of Justice during the last year and a number of valuable
suggestions as to needed legislation, and I invite your careful attention
to the same.

The condition of business in the courts of the United States is such that
there seems to be an imperative necessity for remedial legislation on the
subject. Some of these courts are so overburdened with pending causes that
the delays in determining litigation amount often to a denial of justice.
Among the plans suggested for relief is one submitted by the
Attorney-General. Its main features are: The transfer of all the original
jurisdiction of the circuit courts to the district courts and an increase
of judges for the latter where necessary; an addition of judges to the
circuit courts, and constituting them exclusively courts of appeal, and
reasonably limiting appeals thereto; further restrictions of the right to
remove causes from the State to Federal courts; permitting appeals to the
Supreme Court from the courts of the District of Columbia and the
Territories only in the same cases as they are allowed from State courts,
and guarding against an unnecessary number of appeals from the circuit
courts.

I approve the plan thus outlined, and recommend the legislation necessary
for its application to our judicial system.

The present mode of compensating United States marshals and district
attorneys should, in my opinion, be changed. They are allowed to charge
against the Government certain fees for services, their income being
measured by the amount of such fees within a fixed limit as to their annual
aggregate. This is a direct inducement for them to make their fees in
criminal cases as large as possible in an effort to reach the maximum sum
permitted. As an entirely natural consequence, unscrupulous marshals are
found encouraging frivolous prosecutions, arresting people on petty charges
of crime and transporting them to distant places for examination and trial,
for the purpose of earning mileage and other fees; and district attorneys
uselessly attend criminal examinations far from their places of residence
for the express purpose of swelling their accounts against the Government.
The actual expenses incurred in these transactions are also charged against
the Government.

Thus the rights and freedom of our citizens are outraged and public
expenditures increased for the purpose of furnishing public officers
pretexts for increasing the measure of their compensation.

I think marshals and district attorneys should be paid salaries, adjusted
by a rule which will make them commensurate with services fairly rendered.

In connection with this subject I desire to suggest the advisability, if it
be found not obnoxious to constitutional objection, of investing United
States commissioners with the power to try and determine certain violations
of law within the grade of misdemeanors. Such trials might be made to
depend upon the option of the accused. The multiplication of small and
technical offenses, especially under the provisions of our internal-revenue
law, render some change in our present system very desirable in the
interests of humanity as well as economy. The district courts are now
crowded with petty prosecutions, involving a punishment in case of
conviction, of only a slight fine, while the parties accused are harassed
by an enforced attendance upon courts held hundreds of miles from their
homes. If poor and friendless, they are obliged to remain in jail during
months, perhaps, that elapse before a session of the court is held, and are
finally brought to trial surrounded by strangers and with but little real
opportunity for defense. In the meantime frequently the marshal has charged
against the Government his fees for an arrest, the transportation of the
accused and the expense of the same, and for summoning witnesses before a
commissioner, a grand jury, and a court; the witnesses have been paid from
the public funds large fees and traveling expenses, and the commissioner
and district attorney have also made their charges against the Government.

This abuse in the administration of our criminal law should be remedied;
and if the plan above suggested is not practicable, some other should be
devised.

The report of the Secretary of the Interior, containing an account of the
operations of this important Department and much interesting information,
will be submitted for your consideration.

The most intricate and difficult subject in charge of this Department is
the treatment and management of the Indians. I am satisfied that some
progress may be noted in their condition as a result of a prudent
administration of the present laws and regulations for their control.

But it is submitted that there is lack of a fixed purpose or policy on this
subject, which should be supplied. It is useless to dilate upon the wrongs
of the Indians, and as useless to indulge in the heartless belief that
because their wrongs are revenged in their own atrocious manner, therefore
they should be exterminated.

They are within the care of our Government, and their rights are, or should
be, protected from invasion by the most solemn obligations. They are
properly enough called the wards of the Government; and it should be borne
in mind that this guardianship involves on our part efforts for the
improvement of their condition and the enforcement of their rights. There
seems to be general concurrence in the proposition that the ultimate object
of their treatment should be their civilization and citizenship. Fitted by
these to keep pace in the march of progress with the advanced civilization
about them, they will readily assimilate with the mass of our population,
assuming the responsibilities and receiving the protection incident to this
condition.

The difficulty appears to be in the selection of the means to be at present
employed toward the attainment of this result.

Our Indian population, exclusive of those in Alaska, is reported as
numbering 260,000, nearly all being located on lands set apart for their
use and occupation, aggregating over 134,000,000 acres. These lands are
included in the boundaries of 171 reservations of different dimensions,
scattered in 21 States and Territories, presenting great variations in
climate and in the kind and quality of their soils. Among the Indians upon
these several reservations there exist the most marked differences in
natural traits and disposition and in their progress toward civilization.
While some are lazy, vicious, and stupid, others are industrious, peaceful,
and intelligent; while a portion of them are self-supporting and
independent, and have so far advanced in civilization that they make their
own laws, administered through officers of their own choice, and educate
their children in schools of their own establishment and maintenance,
others still retain, in squalor and dependence, almost the savagery of
their natural state.

In dealing with this question the desires manifested by the Indians should
not be ignored. Here again we find a great diversity. With some the tribal
relation is cherished with the utmost tenacity, while its hold upon others
is considerably relaxed; the love of home is strong with all, and yet there
are those whose attachment to a particular locality is by no means
unyielding; the ownership of their lands in severalty is much desired by
some, while by others, and sometimes among the most civilized, such a
distribution would be bitterly opposed.

The variation of their wants, growing out of and connected with the
character of their several locations, should be regarded. Some are upon
reservations most fit for grazing, but without flocks or herds; and some on
arable land, have no agricultural implements. While some of the
reservations are double the size necessary to maintain the number of
Indians now upon them, in a few cases, perhaps, they should be enlarged.

Add to all this the difference in the administration of the agencies. While
the same duties are devolved upon all, the disposition of the agents and
the manner of their contact with the Indians have much to do with their
condition and welfare. The agent who perfunctorily performs his duty and
slothfully neglects all opportunity to advance their moral and physical
improvement and fails to inspire them with a desire for better things will
accomplish nothing in the direction of their civilization, while he who
feels the burden of an important trust and has an interest in his work
will, by consistent example, firm yet considerate treatment, and
well-directed aid and encouragement, constantly lead those under his charge
toward the light of their enfranchisement.

The history of all the progress which has been made in the civilization of
the Indian I think will disclose the fact that the beginning has been
religious teaching, followed by or accompanying secular education. While
the self-sacrificing and pious men and women who have aided in this good
work by their independent endeavor have for their reward the beneficent
results of their labor and the consciousness of Christian duty well
performed, their valuable services should be fully acknowledged by all who
under the law are charged with the control and management of our Indian
wards.

What has been said indicates that in the present condition of the Indians
no attempt should be made to apply a fixed and unyielding plan of action to
their varied and varying needs and circumstances.

The Indian Bureau, burdened as it is with their general oversight and with
the details of the establishment, can hardly possess itself of the minute
phases of the particular cases needing treatment; and thus the propriety of
creating an instrumentality auxiliary to those already established for the
care of the Indians suggests itself.

I recommend the passage of a law authorizing the appointment of six
commissioners, three of whom shall be detailed from the Army, to be charged
with the duty of a careful inspection from time to time of all the Indians
upon our reservations or subject to the care and control of the Government,
with a view of discovering their exact condition and needs and determining
what steps shall be taken on behalf of the Government to improve their
situation in the direction of their self-support and complete civilization;
that they ascertain from such inspection what, if any, of the reservations
may be reduced in area, and in such cases what part not needed for Indian
occupation may be purchased by the Government from the Indians and disposed
of for their benefit; what, if any, Indians may, with their consent, be
removed to other reservations, with a view of their concentration and the
sale on their behalf of their abandoned reservations; what Indian lands now
held in common should be allotted in severalty; in what manner and to what
extent the Indians upon the reservations can be placed under the protection
of our laws and subjected to their penalties, and which, if any, Indians
should be invested with the right of citizenship. The powers and functions
of the commissioners in regard to these subjects should be clearly defined,
though they should, in conjunction with the Secretary of the Interior, be
given all the authority to deal definitely with the questions presented
deemed safe and consistent.

They should be also charged with the duty of ascertaining the Indians who
might properly be furnished with implements of agriculture, and of what
kind; in what cases the support of the Government should be withdrawn;
where the present plan of distributing Indian supplies should be changed;
where schools may be established and where discontinued; the conduct,
methods, and fitness of agents in charge of reservations; the extent to
which such reservations are occupied or intruded upon by unauthorized
persons, and generally all matters related to the welfare and improvement
of the Indian.

They should advise with the Secretary of the Interior concerning these
matters of detail in management, and he should be given power to deal with
them fully, if he is not now invested with such power.

This plan contemplates the selection of persons for commissioners who are
interested in the Indian question and who have practical ideas upon the
subject of their treatment.

The expense of the Indian Bureau during the last fiscal year was more than
six and a halt million dollars. I believe much of this expenditure might be
saved under the plan proposed; that its economical effects would be
increased with its continuance; that the safety of our frontier settlers
would be subserved under its operation, and that the nation would be saved
through its results from the imputation of inhumanity, injustice, and
mismanagement.

In order to carry out the policy of allotment of Indian lands in severalty,
when deemed expedient, it will be necessary to have surveys completed of
the reservations, and, I hope that provision will be made for the
prosecution of this work.

In May of the present year a small portion of the Chiricahua Apaches on the
White Mountain Reservation, in Arizona, left the reservation and committed
a number of murders and depredations upon settlers in that neighborhood.
Though prompt and energetic action was taken by the military, the renegades
eluded capture and escaped into Mexico. The formation of the country
through which these Indians passed, their thorough acquaintance with the
same, the speed of their escape, and the manner in which they scattered and
concealed themselves among the mountains near the scene of their outrages
put our soldiers at a great disadvantage in their efforts to capture them,
though the expectation is still entertained that they will be ultimately
taken and punished for their crimes.

The threatening and disorderly conduct of the Cheyennes in the Indian
Territory early last summer caused considerable alarm and uneasiness.
Investigation proved that their threatening attitude was due in a great
measure to the occupation of the land of their reservation by immense herds
of cattle, which their owners claimed were rightfully there under certain
leases made by the Indians. Such occupation appearing upon examination to
be unlawful notwithstanding these leases, the intruders were ordered to
remove with their cattle from the lands of the Indians by Executive
proclamation. The enforcement of this proclamation had the effect of
restoring peace and order among the Indians, and they are now quiet and
well behaved.

By an Executive order issued on February 27, 1885, by my predecessor, a
portion of the tract of country in the territory known as the Old Winnebago
and Crow Creek reservations was directed to be restored to the public
domain and opened to settlement under the land laws of the United States,
and a large number of persons entered upon those lands. This action alarmed
the Sioux Indians, who claimed the territory as belonging to their
reservation under the treaty of 1868. This claim was determined, after
careful investigation, to be well rounded, and consequently the Executive
order referred to was by proclamation of April 17, 1885, declared to be
inoperative and of no effect, and all persons upon the land were warned to
leave. This warning has been substantially complied with.

The public domain had its origin in cessions of land by the States to the
General Government. The first cession was made by the State of New York,
and the largest, which in area exceeded all the others, by the State of
Virginia. The territory the proprietorship of which became thus vested in
the General Government extended from the western line of Pennsylvania to
the Mississippi River. These patriotic donations of the States were
encumbered with no condition except that they should the held and used "for
the common benefit of the United States." By purchase with the common fund
of all the people additions were made to this domain until it extended to
the northern line of Mexico, the Pacific Ocean, and the Polar Sea. The
original trust, "for the common benefit of the United States," attached to
all. In the execution of that trust the policy of many homes, rather than
large estates, was adopted by the Government. That these might be easily
obtained, and be the abode of security and contentment, the laws for their
acquisition were few, easily understood, and general in their character.
But the pressure of local interests, combined with a speculative spirit,
have in many instances procured the passage of laws which marred the
harmony of the general plan and encumbered the system with a multitude of
general and special enactments which render the land laws complicated,
subject the titles to uncertainty, and the purchasers often to oppression
and wrong. Laws which were intended for the "common benefit" have been
perverted so that large quantities of land are vesting in single
ownerships. From the multitude and character of the laws, this consequence
seems incapable of correction by mere administration.

It is not for the "common benefit of the United States" that a large area
of the public lands should be acquired, directly or through fraud, in the
hands of a single individual. The nation's strength is in the people. The
nation's prosperity is in their prosperity. The nation's glory is in the
equality of her justice. The nation's perpetuity is in the patriotism of
all her people. Hence, as far as practicable, the plan adopted in the
disposal of the public lands should have in view the original policy, which
encouraged many purchases of these lands for homes and discouraged the
massing of large areas. Exclusive of Alaska, about three-fifths of the
national domain has been sold or subjected to contract or grant. Of the
remaining two-fifths a considerable portion is either mountain or desert. A
rapidly increasing population creates a growing demand for homes, and the
accumulation of wealth inspires an eager competition to obtain the public
land for speculative purposes. In the future this collision of interests
will be more marked than in the past, and the execution of the nation's
trust in behalf of our settlers will be more difficult. I therefore commend
to your attention the recommendations contained in the report of the
Secretary of the Interior with reference to the repeal and modification of
certain of our land laws.

The nation has made princely grants and subsidies to a system of railroads
projected as great national highways to connect the Pacific States with the
East. It has been charged that these donations from the people have been
diverted to private gain and corrupt uses, and thus public indignation has
been aroused and suspicion engendered. Our great nation does not begrudge
its generosity, but it abhors speculation and fraud; and the favorable
regard of our people for the great corporations to which these grants were
made can only be revived by a restoration of confidence, to be secured by
their constant, unequivocal, and clearly manifested integrity. A faithful
application of the undiminished proceeds of the grants to the construction
and perfecting of their roads, an honest discharge of their obligations,
and entire justice to all the people in the enjoyment of their rights on
these highways of travel are all the public asks, and it will be content
with no less. To secure these things should be the common purpose of the
officers of the Government, as well as of the corporations. With this
accomplishment prosperity would be permanently secured to the roads, and
national pride would take the place of national complaint.

It appears from the report of the Commissioner of Pensions that there were
on the 1st day of July, 1885, 345,125 persons borne upon the pension rolls,
who were classified as follows: Army invalids, 241,456; widows, minor
children, and dependent relatives of deceased soldiers, 78,841; navy
invalids, 2,745; navy widows, minor children, and dependents, 1,926;
survivors of the War of 1812, 2,945; and widows of those who served in that
war, 17,212. About one man in ten of all those who enlisted in the late war
are reported as receiving pensions, exclusive of the dependents of deceased
soldiers. On the 1st of July, 1875, the number of pensioners was 234,821,
and the increase within the ten years next thereafter was 110,304.

While there is no expenditure of the public funds which the people more
cheerfully approve than that made in recognition of the services of our
soldiers living and dead, the sentiment underlying the subject should not
be vitiated by the introduction of any fraudulent practices. Therefore it
is fully as important that the rolls should be cleansed of all those who by
fraud have secured a place thereon as that meritorious claims should be
speedily examined and adjusted. The reforms in the methods of doing the
business of this Bureau which have lately been inaugurated promise better
results in both these directions.

The operations of the Patent Office demonstrate the activity of the
inventive genius of the country. For the year ended June 30, 1885, the
applications for patents, including reissues, and for the registration of
trade-marks and labels, numbered 35,688. During the same period there were
22,928 patents granted and reissued and 1,429 trade-marks and labels
registered. The number of patents issued in the year 1875 was 14,387. The
receipts during the last fiscal year were $ 1,074,974.35, and the total
expenditures, not including contingent expenses, $934,123.11.

There were 9,788 applications for patents pending on the 1st day of July,
1884, and 5,786 on the same date in the year 1885. There has been
considerable improvement made in the prompt determination of applications
and a consequent relief to expectant inventors.

A number of suggestions and recommendations are contained in the report of
the Commissioner of patents which are well entitled to the consideration of
Congress.

In the Territory of Utah the law of the United States passed for the
Suppression of polygamy has been energetically and faithfully executed
during the past year, with measurably good results. A number of convictions
have been secured for unlawful cohabitation, and in some cases pleas of
guilty have been entered and a slight punishment imposed, upon a promise by
the accused that they would not again offend against the law, nor advise,
counsel, aid, or abet in any way its violation by others.

The Utah commissioners express the opinion, based upon such information as
they are able to obtain, that but few polygamous marriages have taken place
in the Territory during the last year. They further report that while there
can not be found upon the registration lists of voters the name of a man
actually guilty of polygamy, and while none of that class are holding
office, yet at the last election in the Territory all the officers elected,
except in one county, were men who, though not actually living in the
practice of polygamy, subscribe to the doctrine of polygamous marriages as
a divine revelation and a law unto all higher and more binding upon the
conscience than any human law, local or national. Thus is the strange
spectacle presented of a community protected by a republican form of
government, to which they owe allegiance, sustaining by their suffrages a
principle and a belief which set at naught that obligation of absolute
obedience to the law of the land which lies at the foundation of republican
institutions.

The strength, the perpetuity, and the destiny of the nation rest upon our
homes, established by the law of God, guarded by parental care, regulated
by parental authority, and sanctified by parental love.

These are not the homes of polygamy.

The mothers of our land, who rule the nation as they mold the characters
and guide the actions of their sons, live according to God's holy
ordinances, and each, secure and happy in the exclusive love of the father
of her children, sheds the warm light of true womanhood, unperverted and
unpolluted, upon all within her pure and wholesome family circle.

These are not the cheerless, crushed, and unwomanly mothers of polygamy.

The fathers of our families are the best citizens of the Republic. Wife and
children are the sources of patriotism, and conjugal and parental affection
beget devotion to the country. The man who, undefiled with plural marriage,
is surrounded in his single home with his wife and children has a stake in
the country which inspires him with respect for its laws and courage for
its defense.

These are not the fathers of polygamous families.

There is no feature of this practice or the system which sanctions it which
is not opposed to all that is of value in our institutions.

There should be no relaxation in the firm but just execution of the law now
in operation, and I should be glad to approve such further discreet
legislation as will rid the country of this blot upon its fair fame.

Since the people upholding polygamy in our Territories are reenforced by
immigration from other lands, I recommend that a law be passed to prevent
the importation of Mormons into the country.

The agricultural interest of the country demands just recognition and
liberal encouragement. It sustains with certainty and unfailing strength
our nation's prosperity by the products of its steady toil, and bears its
full share of the burden of taxation without complaint. Our agriculturists
have but slight personal representation in the councils of the nation, and
are generally content with the humbler duties of citizenship and willing to
trust to the bounty of nature for a reward of their labor. But the
magnitude and value of this industry are appreciated when the statement is
made that of our total annual exports more than three-fourths are the
products of agriculture, and of our total population nearly one-half are
exclusively engaged in that occupation.

The Department of Agriculture was created for the purpose of acquiring and
diffusing among the people useful information respecting the subjects it
has in charge, and aiding in the cause of intelligent and progressive
farming, by the collection of statistics, by testing the value and
usefulness of new seeds and plants, and distributing such as are found
desirable among agriculturists. This and other powers and duties with which
this Department is invested are of the utmost importance, and if wisely
exercised must be of great benefit to the country. The aim of our
beneficent Government is the improvement of the people in every station and
the amelioration of their condition. Surely our agriculturists should not
be neglected. The instrumentality established in aid of the farmers of the
land should not only be well equipped for the accomplishment of its
purpose, but those for whose benefit it has been adopted should be
encouraged to avail themselves fully of its advantages.

The prohibition of the importation into several countries of certain of our
animals and their products, based upon the suspicion that health is
endangered in their use and consumption, suggests the importance of such
precautions for the protection of our stock of all kinds against disease as
will disarm suspicion of danger and cause the removal of such an injurious
prohibition.

If the laws now in operation are insufficient to accomplish this
protection, I recommend their amendment to meet the necessities of the
situation; and I commend to the consideration of Congress the suggestions
contained in the report of the Commissioner of Agriculture calculated to
increase the value and efficiency of this Department.

The report of the Civil Service Commission, which will be submitted,
contains an account of the manner in which the civil-service law has been
executed during the last year and much valuable information on this
important subject.

I am inclined to think that there is no sentiment more general in the minds
of the people of our country than a conviction of the correctness of the
principle upon which the law enforcing civil-service reform is based. In
its present condition the law regulates only a part of the subordinate
public positions throughout the country. It applies the test of fitness to
applicants for these places by means of a competitive examination, and
gives large discretion to the Commissioners as to the character of the
examination and many other matters connected with its execution. Thus the
rules and regulations adopted by the Commission have much to do with the
practical usefulness of the statute and with the results of its
application.

The people may well trust the Commission to execute the law with perfect
fairness and with as little irritation as is possible. But of course no
relaxation of the principle which underlies it and no weakening of the
safeguards which surround it can be expected. Experience in its
administration will probably suggest amendment of the methods of its
execution, but I venture to hope that we shall never again be remitted to
the system which distributes public positions purely as rewards for
partisan service. Doubts may well be entertained whether our Government
could survive the strain of a continuance of this system, which upon every
change of Administration inspires an immense army of claimants for office
to lay siege to the patronage of Government, engrossing the time of public
officers with their importunities, spreading abroad the contagion of their
disappointment, and filling the air with the tumult of their discontent.

The allurements of an immense number of offices and places exhibited to the
voters of the land, and the promise of their bestowal in recognition of
partisan activity; debauch the suffrage and rob political action of its
thoughtful and deliberative character. The evil would increase with the
multiplication of offices consequent upon our extension, and the mania for
office holding, growing from its indulgence, would pervade our population
so generally that patriotic purpose, the support of principle, the desire
for the public good, and solicitude for the nation's welfare would be
nearly banished from the activity of our party contests and cause them to
degenerate into ignoble, selfish, and disgraceful struggles for the
possession of office and public place.

Civil-service reform enforced by law came none too soon to check the
progress of demoralization.

One of its effects, not enough regarded, is the freedom it brings to the
political action of those conservative and sober men who, in fear of the
confusion and risk attending an arbitrary and sudden change in all the
public offices with a change of party rule, cast their ballots against such
a chance.

Parties seem to be necessary, and will long continue to exist; nor can it
be now denied that there are legitimate advantages, not disconnected with
office holding, which follow party supremacy. While partisanship continues
bitter and pronounced and supplies so much of motive to sentiment and
action, it is not fair to hold public officials in charge of important
trusts responsible for the best results in the performance of their duties,
and yet insist that they shall rely in confidential and important places
upon the work of those not only opposed to them in political affiliation,
but so steeped in partisan prejudice and rancor that they have no loyalty
to their chiefs and no desire for their success. Civil-service reform does
not exact this, nor does it require that those in subordinate positions who
fail in yielding their best service or who are incompetent should be
retained simply because they are in place. The whining of a clerk
discharged for indolence or incompetency, who, though he gained his place
by the worst possible operation of the spoils system, suddenly discovers
that he is entitled to protection under the sanction of civil-service
reform, represents an idea no less absurd than the clamor of the applicant
who claims the vacant position as his compensation for the most
questionable party work.

The civil-service law does not prevent the discharge of the indolent or
incompetent clerk, but it does prevent supplying his place with the unfit
party worker. Thus in both these phases is seen benefit to the public
service. And the people who desire good government, having secured this
statute, will not relinquish its benefits without protest. Nor are they
unmindful of the fact that its full advantages can only be gained through
the complete good faith of those having its execution in charge. And this
they will insist upon.

I recommend that the salaries of the Civil Service Commissioners be
increased to a sum more nearly commensurate to their important duties.

It is a source of considerable and not unnatural discontent that no
adequate provision has yet been made for accommodating the principal
library of the Government. Of the vast collection of books and pamphlets
gathered at the Capitol, numbering some 700,000, exclusive of manuscripts,
maps, and the products of the graphic arts, also of great volume and value,
only about 300,000 volumes, or less than half the collection, are provided
with shelf room. The others, which are increasing at the rate of from
twenty-five to thirty thousand volumes a year, are not only inaccessible to
the public, but are subject to serious damage and deterioration from other
causes in their present situation.

A consideration of the facts that the library of the Capitol has twice been
destroyed or damaged by fire, its daily increasing value, and its
importance as a place of deposit of books under the law relating to
copyright makes manifest the necessity of prompt action to insure its
proper accommodation and protection.

My attention has been called to a controversy which has arisen from the
condition of the law relating to railroad facilities in the city of
Washington, which has involved the Commissioners of the District in much
annoyance and trouble. I hope this difficulty will be promptly settled by
appropriate legislation.

The Commissioners represent that enough of the revenues of the District are
now on deposit in the Treasury of the United States to repay the sum
advanced by the Government for sewer improvements under the act of June 30,
1884. They desire now an advance of the share which ultimately should be
borne by the District of the cost of extensive improvements to the streets
of the city. The total expense of these contemplated improvements is
estimated at $1,000,000, and they are of the opinion that a considerable
sum could be saved if they had all the money in hand, so that contracts for
the whole work could be made at the same time. They express confidence that
if the advance asked for should be made the Government would be reimbursed
the same within a reasonable time. I have no doubt that these improvements
could be made much cheaper if undertaken together and prosecuted according
to a general plan.

The license law now in force within the District is deficient and uncertain
in some of its provisions and ought to be amended. The Commissioners urge,
with good reason, the necessity of providing a building for the use of the
District government which shall better secure the safety and preservation
of its valuable books and records.

The present condition of the law relating to the succession to the
Presidency in the event of the death, disability, or removal of both the
President and Vice-President is such as to require immediate amendment.
This subject has repeatedly been considered by Congress, but no result has
been reached. The recent lamentable death of the Vice-President, and
vacancies at the same time in all other offices the incumbents of which
might immediately exercise the functions of the presidential office, has
caused public anxiety and a just demand that a recurrence of such a
condition of affairs should not be permitted.

In conclusion I commend to the wise care and thoughtful attention of
Congress the needs, the welfare, and the aspirations of an intelligent and
generous nation. To subordinate these to the narrow advantages of
partisanship or the accomplishment of selfish aims is to violate the
people's trust and betray the people's interests; but an individual sense
of responsibility on the part of each of us and a stern determination to
perform our duty well must give us place among those who have added in
their day and generation to the glory and prosperity of our beloved land.

1886:
To the Congress of the United States:

In discharge of a constitutional duty, and following a well-established
precedent in the Executive office, I herewith transmit to the Congress at
its reassembling certain information concerning the state of the Union,
together with such recommendations for legislative consideration as appear
necessary and expedient.

Our Government has consistently maintained its relations of friendship
toward all other powers and of neighborly interest toward those whose
possessions are contiguous to our own. Few questions have arisen during the
past year with other governments, and none of those are beyond the reach of
settlement in friendly counsel.

We are as yet without provision for the settlement of claims of citizens of
the United States against Chile for injustice during the late war with Peru
and Bolivia. The mixed commissions organized under claims conventions
concluded by the Chilean Government with certain European States have
developed an amount of friction which we trust can be avoided in the
convention which our representative at Santiago is authorized to
negotiate.

The cruel treatment of inoffensive Chinese has, I regret to say, been
repeated in some of the far Western States and Territories, and acts of
violence against those people, beyond the power of the local constituted
authorities to prevent and difficult to punish, are reported even in
distant Alaska. Much of this violence can be traced to race prejudice and
competition of labor, which can not, however, justify the oppression of
strangers whose safety is guaranteed by our treaty with China equally with
the most favored nations.

In opening our vast domain to alien elements the purpose of our lawgivers
was to invite assimilation, and not to provide an arena for endless
antagonism. The paramount duty of maintaining public order and defending
the interests of our own people may require the adoption of measures of
restriction, but they should not tolerate the oppression of individuals of
a special race. I am not without assurance that the Government of China,
whose friendly disposition toward us I am most happy to recognize, will
meet us halfway in devising a comprehensive remedy by which an effective
limitation of Chinese emigration, joined to protection of those Chinese
subjects who remain in this country, may be secured.

Legislation is needed to execute the provisions of our Chinese convention
of 1880 touching the opium traffic.

While the good will of the Colombian Government toward our country is
manifest, the situation of American interests on the Isthmus of Panama has
at times excited concern and invited friendly action looking to the
performance of the engagements of the two nations concerning the territory
embraced in the interoceanic transit. With the subsidence of the Isthmian
disturbances and the erection of the State of Panama into a federal
district under the direct government of the constitutional administration
at Bogota, a new order of things has been inaugurated, which, although as
yet somewhat experimental and affording scope for arbitrary exercise of
power by the delegates of the national authority, promises much
improvement.

The sympathy between the people of the United States and France, born
during our colonial struggle for independence and continuing today, has
received a fresh impulse in the successful completion and dedication of the
colossal statue of "Liberty Enlightening the World" in New York Harbor--the
gift of Frenchmen to Americans.

A convention between the United States and certain other powers for the
protection of submarine cables was signed at Paris on March 14, 1884, and
has been duly ratified and proclaimed by this Government. By agreement
between the high contracting parties this convention is to go into effect
on the 1st of January next, but the legislation required for its execution
in the United States has not yet been adopted. I earnestly recommend its
enactment.

Cases have continued to occur in Germany giving rise to much correspondence
in relation to the privilege of sojourn of our naturalized citizens of
German origin revisiting the land of their birth, yet I am happy to state
that our relations with that country have lost none of their accustomed
cordiality.

The claims for interest upon the amount of tonnage dues illegally exacted
from certain German steamship lines were favorably reported in both Houses
of Congress at the last session, and I trust will receive final and
favorable action at an early day.

The recommendations contained in my last annual message in relation to a
mode of settlement of the fishery rights in the waters of British North
America, so long a subject of anxious difference between the United States
and Great Britain, was met by an adverse vote of the Senate on April 13
last, and thereupon negotiations were instituted to obtain an agreement
with Her Britannic Majesty's Government for the promulgation of such joint
interpretation and definition of the article of the convention of 1818
relating to the territorial waters and inshore fisheries of the British
Provinces as should secure the Canadian rights from encroachment by the
United States fishermen and at the same time insure the enjoyment by the
latter of the privileges guaranteed to them by such convention.

The questions involved are of long standing, of grave consequence, and from
time to time for nearly three-quarters of a century have given rise to
earnest international discussions, not unaccompanied by irritation.

Temporary arrangements by treaties have served to allay friction, which,
however, has revived as each treaty was terminated. The last arrangement,
under the treaty of 1871, was abrogated after due notice by the United
States on June 30, 1885, but I was enabled to obtain for our fishermen for
the remainder of that season enjoyment of the full privileges accorded by
the terminated treaty.

The joint high commission by whom the treaty had been negotiated, although
invested with plenary power to make a permanent settlement, were content
with a temporary arrangement, after the termination of which the question
was relegated to the stipulations of the treaty of 1818, as to the first
article of which no construction satisfactory to both countries has ever
been agreed upon.

The progress of civilization and growth of population in the British
Provinces to which the fisheries in question are contiguous and the
expansion of commercial intercourse between them and the United States
present to-day a condition of affairs scarcely realizable at the date of
the negotiations of 1818.

New and vast interests have been brought into existence; modes of
intercourse between the respective countries have been invented and
multiplied; the methods of conducting the fisheries have been wholly
changed; and all this is necessarily entitled to candid and careful
consideration in the adjustment of the terms and conditions of intercourse
and commerce between the United States and their neighbors along a frontier
of over 3,500 miles.

This propinquity, community of language and occupation, and similarity of
political and social institutions indicate the practicability and obvious
wisdom of maintaining mutually beneficial and friendly relations.

Whilst I am unfeignedly desirous that such relations should exist between
us and the inhabitants of Canada, yet the action of their officials during
the past season toward our fishermen has been such as to seriously threaten
their continuance.

Although disappointed in my efforts to secure a satisfactory settlement of
the fishery question, negotiations are still pending, with reasonable hope
that before the close of the present session of Congress announcement may
be made that an acceptable conclusion has been reached.

As at an early day there may be laid before Congress the correspondence of
the Department of State in relation to this important subject, so that the
history of the past fishing season may be fully disclosed and the action
and the attitude of the Administration clearly comprehended, a more
extended reference is not deemed necessary in this communication.

The recommendation submitted last year that provision be made for a
preliminary reconnoissance of the conventional boundary line between Alaska
and British Columbia is renewed.

I express my unhesitating conviction that the intimacy of our relations
with Hawaii should be emphasized. As a result of the reciprocity treaty of
1875, those islands, on the highway of Oriental and Australasian traffic,
are virtually an outpost of American commerce and a stepping-stone to the
growing trade of the Pacific. The Polynesian Island groups have been so
absorbed by other and more powerful governments that the Hawaiian Islands
are left almost alone in the enjoyment of their autonomy, which it is
important for us should be preserved. Our treaty is now terminable on one
year's notice, but propositions to abrogate it would be, in my judgment,
most ill advised. The paramount influence we have there acquired, once
relinquished, could only with difficulty be regained, and a valuable ground
of vantage for ourselves might be converted into a stronghold for our
commercial competitors. I earnestly recommend that the existing treaty
stipulations be extended for a further term of seven years. A recently
signed treaty to this end is now before the Senate.

The importance of telegraphic communication between those islands and the
United States should not be overlooked.

The question of a general revision of the treaties of Japan is again under
discussion at Tokyo. As the first to open relations with that Empire, and
as the nation in most direct commercial relations with Japan, the United
States have lost no opportunity to testify their consistent friendship by
supporting the just claims of Japan to autonomy and independence among
nations.

A treaty of extradition between the United States and Japan, the first
concluded by that Empire, has been lately proclaimed.

The weakness of Liberia and the difficulty of maintaining effective
sovereignty over its outlying districts have exposed that Republic to
encroachment. It can not be forgotten that this distant community is an
offshoot of our own system, owing its origin to the associated benevolence
of American citizens, whose praiseworthy efforts to create a nucleus of
civilization in the Dark Continent have commanded respect and sympathy
everywhere, especially in this country. Although a formal protectorate over
Liberia is contrary to our traditional policy, the moral right and duty of
the United States to assist in all proper ways in the maintenance of its
integrity is obvious, and has been consistently announced during nearly
half a century. I recommend that in the reorganization of our Navy a small
vessel, no longer found adequate to our needs, be presented to Liberia, to
be employed by it in the protection of its coastwise revenues.

The encouraging development of beneficial and intimate relations between
the United States and Mexico, which has been so marked within the past few
years, is at once the occasion of congratulation and of friendly
solicitude. I urgently renew my former representation of the need or speedy
legislation by Congress to carry into effect the reciprocity commercial
convention of January 20, 1883.

Our commercial treaty of 1831 with Mexico was terminated, according to its
provisions, in 1881, upon notification given by Mexico in pursuance of her
announced policy of recasting all her commercial treaties. Mexico has since
concluded with several foreign governments new treaties of commerce and
navigation, defining alien rights of trade, property, and residence,
treatment of shipping, consular privileges, and the like. Our yet
unexecuted reciprocity convention of 1883 covers none of these points, the
settlement of which is so necessary to good relationship. I propose to
initiate with Mexico negotiations for a new and enlarged treaty of commerce
and navigation.

In compliance with a resolution of the Senate, I communicated to that body
on August 2 last, and also to the House of Representatives, the
correspondence in the case of A. K. Cutting, an American citizen, then
imprisoned in Mexico, charged with the commission of a penal offense in
Texas, of which a Mexican citizen was the object.

After demand had been made for his release the charge against him was
amended so as to include a violation of Mexican law within Mexican
territory.

This joinder of alleged offenses, one within and the other exterior to
Mexico, induced me to order a special investigation of the case, pending
which Mr. Cutting was released.

The incident has, however, disclosed a claim of jurisdiction by Mexico
novel in our history, whereby any offense committed anywhere by a
foreigner, penal in the place of its commission, and of which a Mexican is
the object, may, if the offender be found in Mexico, be there tried and
punished in conformity with Mexican laws.

This jurisdiction was sustained by the courts of Mexico in the Cutting
case, and approved by the executive branch of that Government, upon the
authority of a Mexican statute. The appellate court in releasing Mr.
Cutting decided that the abandonment of the complaint by the Mexican
citizen aggrieved by the alleged crime (a libelous publication) removed the
basis of further prosecution, and also declared justice to have been
satisfied by the enforcement of a small part of the original sentence.

The admission of such a pretension would be attended with serious results,
invasive of the jurisdiction of this Government and highly dangerous to our
citizens in foreign lands. Therefore I have denied it and protested against
its attempted exercise as unwarranted by the principles of law and
international usages.

A sovereign has jurisdiction of offenses which take effect within his
territory, although concocted or commenced outside of it; but the right is
denied of any foreign sovereign to punish a citizen of the United States
for an offense consummated on our soil in violation of our laws, even
though the offense be against a subject or citizen of such sovereign. The
Mexican statute in question makes the claim broadly, and the principle, if
conceded, would create a dual responsibility in the citizen and lead to
inextricable confusion, destructive of that certainty in the law which is
an essential of liberty.

When citizens of the United States voluntarily go into a foreign country,
they must abide by the laws there in force, and will not be protected by
their own Government from the consequences of an offense against those laws
committed in such foreign country; but watchful care and interest of this
Government over its citizens are not relinquished because they have gone
abroad, and if charged with crime committed in the foreign land a fair and
open trial, conducted with decent regard for justice and humanity, will be
demanded for them. With less than that this Government will not be content
when the life or liberty of its citizens is at stake.

Whatever the degree to which extraterritorial criminal jurisdiction may
have been formerly allowed by consent and reciprocal agreement among
certain of the European States, no such doctrine or practice was ever known
to the laws of this country or of that from which our institutions have
mainly been derived.

In the case of Mexico there are reasons especially strong for perfect
harmony in the mutual exercise of jurisdiction. Nature has made us
irrevocably neighbors, and wisdom and kind feeling should make us friends.

The overflow of capital and enterprise from the United States is a potent
factor in assisting the development of the resources of Mexico and in
building up the prosperity of both countries.

To assist this good work all grounds of apprehension for the security of
person and property should be removed; and I trust that in the interests of
good neighborhood the statute referred to will be so modified as to
eliminate the present possibilities of danger to the peace of the two
countries.

The Government of the Netherlands has exhibited concern in relation to
certain features of our tariff laws, which are supposed by them to be aimed
at a class of tobacco produced in the Dutch East Indies. Comment would seem
unnecessary upon the unwisdom of legislation appearing to have a special
national discrimination for its object, which, although unintentional, may
give rise to injurious retaliation.

The establishment, less than four years ago, of a legation at Teheran is
bearing fruit in the interest exhibited by the Shah's Government in the
industrial activity of the United States and the opportunities of
beneficial interchanges.

Stable government is now happily restored in Peru by the election of a
constitutional president, and a period of rehabilitation is entered upon;
but the recovery is necessarily slow from the exhaustion caused by the late
war and civil disturbances. A convention to adjust by arbitration claims of
our citizens has been proposed and is under consideration.

The naval officer who bore to Siberia the testimonials bestowed by Congress
in recognition of the aid given to the Jeannette survivors has successfully
accomplished his mission. His interesting report will be submitted. It is
pleasant to know that this mark of appreciation has been welcomed by the
Russian Government and people as befits the traditional friendship of the
two countries.

Civil perturbations in the Samoan Islands have during the past few years
been a source of considerable embarrassment to the three
Governments-Germany, Great Britain, and the United States--whose relations
and extraterritorial rights in that important group are guaranteed by
treaties. The weakness of the native administration and the conflict of
opposing interests in the islands have led King Malietoa to seek alliance
or protection in some one quarter, regardless of the distinct engagements
whereby no one of the three treaty powers may acquire any paramount or
exclusive interest. In May last Malietoa offered to place Samoa under the
protection of the United States, and the late consul, without authority,
assumed to grant it. The proceeding was promptly disavowed and the
overzealous official recalled. Special agents of the three Governments have
been deputed to examine the situation in the islands. With a change in the
representation of all three powers and a harmonious understanding between
them, the peace, prosperity, autonomous administration, and neutrality of
Samoa can hardly fail to be secured.

It appearing that the Government of Spain did not extend to the flag of the
United States in the Antilles the full measure of reciprocity requisite
under our statute for the continuance of the suspension of discriminations
against the Spanish flag in our ports, I was constrained in October last to
rescind my predecessor's proclamation of February 14, 1884, permitting such
suspension. An arrangement was, however, speedily reached, and upon
notification from the Government of Spain that all differential treatment
of our vessels and their cargoes, from the United States or from any
foreign country, had been completely and absolutely relinquished, I availed
myself of the discretion conferred by law and issued on the 27th of October
my proclamation declaring reciprocal suspension in the United States. It is
most gratifying to bear testimony to the earnest spirit in which the
Government of the Queen Regent has met our efforts to avert the initiation
of commercial discriminations and reprisals, which are ever disastrous to
the material interests and the political good will of the countries they
may affect.

The profitable development of the large commercial exchanges between the
United States and the Spanish Antilles is naturally an object of
solicitude. Lying close at our doors, and finding here their main markets
of supply and demand, the welfare of Cuba and Puerto Rico and their
production and trade are scarcely less important to us than to Spain. Their
commercial and financial movements are so naturally a part of our system
that no obstacle to fuller and freer intercourse should be permitted to
exist. The standing instructions of our representatives at Madrid and
Havana have for years been to leave no effort unessayed to further these
ends, and at no time has the equal good desire of Spain been more hopefully
manifested than now.

The Government of Spain, by removing the consular tonnage fees on cargoes
shipped to the Antilles and by reducing passport fees, has shown its
recognition of the needs of less trammeled intercourse.

An effort has been made during the past year to remove the hindrances to
the proclamation of the treaty of naturalization with the Sublime Porte,
signed in 1874, which has remained inoperative owing to a disagreement of
interpretation of the clauses relative to the effects of the return to and
sojourn of a naturalized citizen in the land of origin. I trust soon to be
able to announce a favorable settlement of the differences as to this
interpretation.

It has been highly satisfactory to note the improved treatment of American
missionaries in Turkey, as has been attested by their acknowledgments to
our late minister to that Government of his successful exertions in their
behalf.

The exchange of ratifications of the convention of December 5, 1885, with
Venezuela, for the reopening of the awards of the Caracas Commission under
the claims convention of 1866, has not yet been effected, owing to the
delay of the Executive of that Republic in ratifying the measure. I trust
that this postponement will be brief; but should it much longer continue,
the delay may well be regarded as a rescission of the compact and a failure
on the part of Venezuela to complete an arrangement so persistently sought
by her during many years and assented to by this Government in a spirit of
international fairness, although to the detriment of holders of bona fide
awards of the impugned commission.

I renew the recommendation of my last annual message that existing
legislation concerning citizenship and naturalization be revised. We have
treaties with many states providing for the renunciation of citizenship by
naturalized aliens, but no statute is found to give effect to such
engagements, nor any which provides a needed central bureau for the
registration of naturalized citizens.

Experience suggests that our statutes regulating extradition might be
advantageously amended by a provision for the transit across our territory,
now a convenient thoroughfare of travel from one foreign country to
another, of fugitives surrendered by a foreign government to a third state.
Such provisions are not unusual in the legislation of other countries, and
tend to prevent the miscarriage of justice. It is also desirable, in order
to remove present uncertainties, that authority should be conferred on the
Secretary of State to issue a certificate, in case of an arrest for the
purpose of extradition, to the officer before whom the proceeding is
pending, showing that a requisition for the surrender of the person charged
has been duly made. Such a certificate, if required to be received before
the prisoner's examination, would prevent a long and expensive judicial
inquiry into a charge which the foreign government might not desire to
press. I also recommend that express provision be made for the immediate
discharge from custody of persons committed for extradition where the
President is of opinion that surrender should not be made.

The drift of sentiment in civilized communities toward full recognition of
the rights of property in the creations of the human intellect has brought
about the adoption by many important nations of an international copyright
convention, which was signed at Berne on the 18th of September, 1885.

Inasmuch as the Constitution gives to the Congress the power "to promote
the progress of science and useful arts by securing for limited times to
authors and inventors the exclusive right to their respective writings and
discoveries," this Government did not feel warranted in becoming a
signatory pending the action of Congress upon measures of international
copyright now before it; but the right of adhesion to the Berne convention
hereafter has been reserved. I trust the subject will receive at your hands
the attention it deserves, and that the just claims of authors, so urgently
pressed, will be duly heeded.

Representations continue to be made to me of the injurious effect upon
American artists studying abroad and having free access to the art
collections of foreign countries of maintaining a discriminating duty
against the introduction of the works of their brother artists of other
countries, and I am induced to repeat my recommendation for the abolition
of that tax.

Pursuant to a provision of the diplomatic and consular appropriation act
approved July 1, 1886, the estimates submitted by the Secretary of State
for the maintenance of the consular service have been recast on the basis
of salaries for all officers to whom such allowance is deemed advisable.
Advantage has been taken of this to redistribute the salaries of the
offices now appropriated for, in accordance with the work performed, the
importance of the representative duties of the incumbent, and the cost of
living at each post. The last consideration has been too often lost sight
of in the allowances heretofore made. The compensation which may suffice
for the decent maintenance of a worthy and capable officer in a position of
onerous and representative trust at a post readily accessible, and where
the necessaries of life are abundant and cheap, may prove an inadequate
pittance in distant lands, where the better part of a year's pay is
consumed in reaching the post of duty, and where the comforts of ordinary
civilized existence can only be obtained with difficulty and at exorbitant
cost. I trust that in considering the submitted schedules no mistaken
theory of economy will perpetuate a system which in the past has virtually
closed to deserving talent many offices where capacity and attainments of a
high order are indispensable, and in not a few instances has brought
discredit on our national character and entailed embarrassment and even
suffering on those deputed to uphold our dignity and interests abroad.

In connection with this subject I earnestly reiterate the practical
necessity of supplying some mode of trustworthy inspection and report of
the manner in which the consulates are conducted. In the absence of such
reliable information efficiency can scarcely be rewarded or its opposite
corrected.

Increasing competition in trade has directed attention to the value of the
consular reports printed by the Department of State, and the efforts of the
Government to extend the practical usefulness of these reports have created
a wider demand for them at home and a spirit of emulation abroad.
Constituting a record at the changes occurring in trade and of the progress
of the arts and invention in foreign countries, they are much sought for by
all interested in the subjects which they embrace.

The report of the Secretary of the Treasury exhibits in detail the
condition of the public finances and of the several branches of the
Government related to his Department. I especially direct the attention of
the Congress to the recommendations contained in this and the last
preceding report of the Secretary touching the simplification and amendment
of the laws relating to the collection of our revenues, and in the interest
of economy and justice to the Government I hope they may be adopted by
appropriate legislation.

The ordinary receipts of the Government for the fiscal year ended June 30,
1886, were $336,439,727.06. Of this amount $192,905,023.41 was received
from customs and $116,805,936.48 from internal revenue. The total receipts,
as here stated, were $13,749,020.68 greater than for the previous year, but
the increase from customs was $11,434,084.10 and from internal revenue
$4,407,210.94, making a gain in these items for the last year of
$15,841,295.04, a falling off in other resources reducing the total
increase to the smaller amount mentioned.

The expense at the different custom-houses of collecting this increased
customs revenue was less than the expense attending the collection of such
revenue for the preceding year by $490,608, and the increased receipts of
internal revenue were collected at a cost to the Internal-Revenue Bureau
$155,944.99 less than the expense of such collection for the previous
year.

The total ordinary expenses of the Government for the fiscal year ended
June 30, 1886, were $242,483,138.50, being less by $17,788,797 than such
expenditures for the year preceding, and leaving a surplus in the Treasury
at the close of the last fiscal year of $93,956,588.56, as against
$63,463,771.27 at the close of the previous year, being an increase in such
surplus of $30,492,817.29.

The expenditures are compared with those of the preceding fiscal year and
classified as follows:

For the current year to end June 30, 1887, the ascertained receipts up to
October 1, 1886, with such receipts estimated for the remainder of the
year, amount to $356,000,000.

The expenditures ascertained and estimated for the same period are
$266,000,000, indicating an anticipated surplus at the close of the year of
$90,000,000.

The total value of the exports from the United States to foreign countries
during the fiscal year is stated and compared with the preceding year as
follows:

The value of some of our leading exports during the last fiscal year, as
compared with the value of the same for the year immediately preceding, is
here given, and furnishes information both interesting and suggestive:

Our imports during the last fiscal year, as compared with the previous
year, were as follows:

In my last annual message to the Congress attention was directed to the
fact that the revenues of the Government exceeded its actual needs, and it
was suggested that legislative action should be taken to relieve the people
from the unnecessary burden of taxation thus made apparent.

In view of the pressing importance of the subject I deem it my duty to
again urge its consideration.

The income of the Government, by its increased volume and through economies
in its collection, is now more than ever in excess of public necessities.
The application of the surplus to the payment of such portion of the public
debt as is now at our option subject to extinguishment, if continued at the
rate which has lately prevailed, would retire that class of indebtedness
within less than one year from this date. Thus a continuation of our
present revenue system would soon result in the receipt of an annual income
much greater than necessary to meet Government expenses, with no
indebtedness upon which it could be applied. We should then be confronted
with a vast quantity of money, the circulating medium of the people,
hoarded in the Treasury when it should be in their hands, or we should be
drawn into wasteful public extravagance, with all the corrupting national
demoralization which follows in its train.

But it is not the simple existence of this surplus and its threatened
attendant evils which furnish the strongest argument against our present
scale of Federal taxation. Its worst phase is the exaction of such a
surplus through a perversion of the relations between the people and their
Government and a dangerous departure from the rules which limit the right
of Federal taxation.

Good government, and especially the government of which every American
citizen boasts, has for its objects the protection of every person within
its care in the greatest liberty consistent with the good order of society
and his perfect security in the enjoyment of his earnings with the least
possible diminution for public needs. When more of the people's substance
is exacted through the form of taxation than is necessary to meet the just
obligations of the Government and the expense of its economical
administration, such exaction becomes ruthless extortion and a violation of
the fundamental principles of a free government.

The indirect manner in which these exactions are made has a tendency to
conceal their true character and their extent. But we have arrived at a
stage of superfluous revenue which has aroused the people to a realization
of the fact that the amount raised professedly for the support of the
Government is paid by them as absolutely if added to the price of the
things which supply their daily wants as if it was paid at fixed periods
into the hand of the tax gatherer.

Those who toil for daily wages are beginning to understand that capital,
though sometimes vaunting its importance and clamoring for the protection
and favor of the Government, is dull and sluggish till, touched by the
magical hand of labor, it springs into activity, furnishing an occasion for
Federal taxation and gaining the value which enables it to bear its burden.
And the laboring man is thoughtfully inquiring whether in these
circumstances, and considering the tribute he constantly pays into the
public Treasury as he supplies his daily wants, he receives his fair share
of advantages.

There is also a suspicion abroad that the surplus of our revenues indicates
abnormal and exceptional business profits, which, under the system which
produces such surplus, increase without corresponding benefit to the people
at large the vast accumulations of a few among our citizens, whose
fortunes, rivaling the wealth of the most favored in antidemocratic
nations, are not the natural growth of a steady, plain, and industrious
republic.

Our farmers, too, and those engaged directly and indirectly in supplying
the products of agriculture, see that day by day, and as often as the daily
wants of their households recur, they are forced to pay excessive and
needless taxation, while their products struggle in foreign markets with
the competition of nations, which, by allowing a freer exchange of
productions than we permit, enable their people to sell for prices which
distress the American farmer.

As every patriotic citizen rejoices in the constantly increasing pride of
our people in American citizenship and in the glory of our national
achievements and progress, a sentiment prevails that the leading strings
useful to a nation in its infancy may well be to a great extent discarded
in the present stage of American ingenuity, courage, and fearless
self-reliance; and for the privilege of indulging this sentiment with true
American enthusiasm our citizens are quite willing to forego an idle
surplus in the public Treasury.

And all the people know that the average rate of Federal taxation upon
imports is to-day, in time of peace, but little less, while upon some
articles of necessary consumption it is actually more, than was imposed by
the grievous burden willingly borne at a time when the Government needed
millions to maintain by war the safety and integrity of the Union.

It has been the policy of the Government to collect the principal part of
its revenues by a tax upon imports, and no change in this policy is
desirable. But the present condition of affairs constrains our people to
demand that by a revision of our revenue laws the receipts of the
Government shall be reduced to the necessary expense of its economical
administration; and this demand should be recognized and obeyed by the
people's representatives in the legislative branch of the Government.

In readjusting the burdens of Federal taxation a sound public policy
requires that such of our citizens as have built up large and important
industries under present conditions should not be suddenly and to their
injury deprived of advantages to which they have adapted their business;
but if the public good requires it they should be content with such
consideration as shall deal fairly and cautiously with their interests,
while the just demand of the people for relief from needless taxation is
honestly answered.

A reasonable and timely submission to such a demand should certainly be
possible without disastrous shock to any interest; and a cheerful
concession sometimes averts abrupt and heedless action, often the outgrowth
of impatience and delayed justice.

Due regard should be also accorded in any proposed readjustment to the
interests of American labor so far as they are involved. We congratulate
ourselves that there is among us no laboring class fixed within unyielding
bounds and doomed under all conditions to the inexorable fate of daily
toil. We recognize in labor a chief factor in the wealth of the Republic,
and we treat those who have it in their keeping as citizens entitled to the
most careful regard and thoughtful attention. This regard and attention
should be awarded them, not only because labor is the capital of our
workingmen, justly entitled to its share of Government favor, but for the
further and not less important reason that the laboring man, surrounded by
his family in his humble home, as a consumer is vitally interested in all
that cheapens the cost of living and enables him to bring within his
domestic circle additional comforts and advantages.

This relation of the workingman to the revenue laws of the country and the
manner in which it palpably influences the question of wages should not be
forgotten in the justifiable prominence given to the proper maintenance of
the supply and protection of well-paid labor. And these considerations
suggest such an arrangement of Government revenues as shall reduce the
expense of living, while it does not curtail the opportunity for work nor
reduce the compensation of American labor and injuriously affect its
condition and the dignified place it holds in the estimation of our
people.

But our farmers and agriculturists--those who from the soil produce the
things consumed by all--are perhaps more directly and plainly concerned
than any other of our citizens in a just and careful system of Federal
taxation. Those actually engaged in and more remotely connected with this
kind of work number nearly one-half of our population. None labor harder or
more continuously than they. No enactments limit their hours of toil and no
interposition of the Government enhances to any great extent the value of
their products. And yet for many of the necessaries and comforts of life,
which the most scrupulous economy enables them to bring into their homes,
and for their implements of husbandry, they are obliged to pay a price
largely increased by an unnatural profit, which by the action of the
Government is given to the more favored manufacturer.

I recommend that, keeping in view all these considerations, the increasing
and unnecessary surplus of national income annually accumulating be
released to the people by an amendment to our revenue laws which shall
cheapen the price of the necessaries of life and give freer entrance to
such imported materials as by American labor may be manufactured into
marketable commodities.

Nothing can be accomplished, however, in the direction of this much-needed
reform unless the subject is approached in a patriotic spirit of devotion
to the interests of the entire country and with a willingness to yield
something for the public good.

The sum paid upon the public debt during the fiscal year ended June 30,
1886, was $44,551,043.36.

During the twelve months ended October 31,1886, 3 per cent bonds were
called for redemption amounting to $127,283,100, of which $80,643,200 was
so called to answer the requirements of the law relating to the sinking
fund and $46,639,900 for the purpose of reducing the public debt by
application of a part of the surplus in the Treasury to that object. Of the
bonds thus called $102,269,450 became subject under such calls to
redemption prior to November 1, 1886. The remainder, amounting
to $25,013,650, matured under the calls after that date.

In addition to the amount subject to payment and cancellation prior to
November 1, there were also paid before that day certain of these bonds,
with the interest thereon, amounting to $5,072,350, which were anticipated
as to their maturity, of which $2,664,850 had not been called, Thus
$107,341,800 had been actually applied prior to the 1st of November, 1886,
to the extinguishment of our bonded and interest-bearing debt, leaving on
that day still outstanding the sum of $1,153,443,112. Of this amount
$86,848,700 were still represented by 3 per cent bonds. They however, have
been since November 1, or will at once be, further reduced by $22,606,150,
being bonds which have been called, as already stated, but not redeemed and
canceled before the latter date.

During the fiscal year ended June 30, 1886, there were coined, under the
compulsory silver-coinage act of 1878,29,838,905 silver dollars, and the
cost of the silver used in such coinage was $23,448,960.01. There had been
coined up to the close of the previous fiscal year under the provisions of
the law 203,882,554 silver dollars, and on the 1st day of December, 1886,
the total amount of such coinage was $247,131,549.

The Director of the Mint reports that at the time of the passage of the law
of 1878 directing this coinage the intrinsic value of the dollars thus
coined was 94 1/4 cents each, and that on the 31st day of July, 1886, the
price of silver reached the lowest stage ever known, so that the intrinsic
or bullion price of our standard silver dollar at that date was less than
72 cents. The price of silver on the 30th day of November last was such as
to make these dollars intrinsically worth 78 cents each.

These differences in value of the coins represent the fluctuations in the
price of silver, and they certainly do not indicate that compulsory coinage
by the Government enhances the price of that commodity or secures
uniformity in its value.

Every fair and legal effort has been made by the Treasury Department to
distribute this currency among the people. The withdrawal of United States
Treasury notes of small denominations and the issuing of small silver
certificates have been resorted to in the endeavor to accomplish this
result, in obedience to the will and sentiments of the representatives of
the people in the Congress. On the 27th day of November, 1886, the people
held of these coins, or certificates representing them, the nominal sum of
$166,873,041, and we still had $79,464,345 in the Treasury as against about
$142,894,055 so in the hands of the people and $72,865,376 remaining in the
Treasury one year ago. The Director of the Mint again urges the necessity
of more vault room for the purpose of storing these silver dollars which
are not needed for circulation by the people.

I have seen no reason to change the views expressed in my last annual
message on the subject of this compulsory coinage, and I again urge its
suspension on all the grounds contained in my former recommendation,
reenforced by the significant increase of our gold exportations during the
last year, as appears by the comparative statement herewith presented, and
for the further reasons that the more this currency is distributed among
the people the greater becomes our duty to protect it from disaster, that
we now have abundance for all our needs, and that there seems but little
propriety in building vaults to store such currency when the only pretense
for its coinage is the necessity of its use by the people as a circulating
medium.

The great number of suits now pending in the United States courts for the
southern district of New York growing out of the collection of customs
revenue at the port of New York and the number of such suits that are
almost daily instituted are certainly worthy the attention of the Congress.
These legal controversies, based upon conflicting views by importers and
the collector as to the interpretation of our present complex and
indefinite revenue laws, might be largely obviated by an amendment of those
laws.

But pending such amendment the present condition of this litigation should
be relieved. There are now pending about 2,500 of these suits. More than
1,100 have been commenced within the past eighteen months, and many of the
others have been at issue for more than twenty-five years. These delays
subject the Government to loss of evidence and prevent the preparation
necessary to defeat unjust and fictitious claims, while constantly accruing
interest threatens to double the demands involved.

In the present condition of the dockets of the courts, well filled with
private suits, and of the force allowed the district attorney, no greater
than is necessary for the ordinary and current business of his office,
these revenue litigations can not be considered.

In default of the adoption by the Congress of a plan for the general
reorganization of the Federal courts, as has been heretofore recommended, I
urge the propriety of passing a law permitting the appointment of an
additional Federal judge in the district where these Government suits have
accumulated, so that by continuous sessions of the courts devoted to the
trial of these cases they may be determined.

It is entirely plain that a great saving to the Government would be
accomplished by such a remedy, and the suitors who have honest claims would
not be denied justice through delay.

The report of the Secretary of War gives a detailed account of the
administration of his Department and contains sundry recommendations for
the improvement of the service, which I fully approve.

The Army consisted at the date of the last consolidated return of 2,103
officers and 24,946 enlisted men.

The expenses of the Department for the last fiscal year were
$36,990,903.38, including $6,294,305.43 for public works and river and
harbor improvements.

I especially direct the attention of the Congress to the recommendation
that officers be required to submit to an examination as a preliminary to
their promotion. I see no objection, but many advantages, in adopting this
feature, which has operated so beneficially in our Navy Department, as well
as in some branches of the Army.

The subject of coast defenses and fortifications has been fully and
carefully treated by the Board on Fortifications, whose report was
submitted at the last session of Congress; but no construction work of the
kind recommended by the board has been possible during the last year from
the lack of appropriations for such purpose.

The defenseless condition of our seacoast and lake frontier is perfectly
palpable. The examinations made must convince us all that certain of our
cities named in the report of the board should be fortified and that work
on the most important of these fortifications should be commenced at once.
The work has been thoroughly considered and laid out, the Secretary of War
reports, but all is delayed in default of Congressional action.

The absolute necessity, judged by all standards of prudence and foresight,
of our preparation for an effectual resistance against the armored ships
and steel guns and mortars of modern construction which may threaten the
cities on our coasts is so apparent that I hope effective steps will be
taken in that direction immediately.

The valuable and suggestive treatment of this question by the Secretary of
War is earnestly commended to the consideration of the Congress.

In September and October last the hostile Apaches who, under the leadership
of Geronimo, had for eighteen months been on the war path, and during that
time had committed many murders and been the cause of constant terror to
the settlers of Arizona, surrendered to General Miles, the military
commander who succeeded General Crook in the management and direction of
their pursuit.

Under the terms of their surrender as then reported, and in view of the
understanding which these murderous savages seemed to entertain of the
assurances given them, it was considered best to imprison them in such
manner as to prevent their ever engaging in such outrages again, instead of
trying them for murder. Fort Pickens having been selected as a safe place
of confinement, all the adult males were sent thither and will be closely
guarded as prisoners. In the meantime the residue of the band, who, though
still remaining upon the reservation, were regarded as unsafe and suspected
of furnishing aid to those on the war path, had been removed to Fort
Marion. The women and larger children of the hostiles were also taken
there, and arrangements have been made for putting the children of proper
age in Indian schools.

The report of the Secretary of the Navy contains a detailed exhibit of the
condition of his Department, with such a statement of the action needed to
improve the same as should challenge the earnest attention of the
Congress.

The present Navy of the United States, aside from the ships in course of
construction, consists of--

First. Fourteen single-turreted monitors, none of which are in commission
nor at the present time serviceable. The batteries of these ships are
obsolete, and they can only be relied upon as auxiliary ships in harbor
defense, and then after such an expenditure upon them as might not be
deemed justifiable.

Second. Five fourth-rate vessels of small tonnage, only one of which was
designed as a war vessel, and all of which are auxiliary merely.

Third. Twenty-seven cruising ships, three of which are built of iron, of
small tonnage, and twenty-four of wood. Of these wooden vessels it is
estimated by the Chief Constructor of the Navy that only three will be
serviceable beyond a period of six years, at which time it may be said that
of the present naval force nothing worthy the name will remain.

All the vessels heretofore authorized are under contract or in course of
construction except the armored ships, the torpedo and dynamite boats, and
one cruiser. As to the last of these, the bids were in excess of the limit
fixed by Congress. The production in the United States of armor and gun
steel is a question which it seems necessary to settle at an early day if
the armored war vessels are to be completed with those materials of home
manufacture. This has been the subject of investigation by two boards and
by two special committees of Congress within the last three years. The
report of the Gun Foundry Board in 1884, of the Board on Fortifications
made in January last, and the reports of the select committees of the two
Houses made at the last session of Congress have entirely exhausted the
subject, so far as preliminary investigation is involved, and in their
recommendations they are substantially agreed.

In the event that the present invitation of the Department for bids to
furnish such of this material as is now authorized shall fail to induce
domestic manufacturers to undertake the large expenditures required to
prepare for this new manufacture, and no other steps are taken by Congress
at its coming session, the Secretary contemplates with dissatisfaction the
necessity of obtaining abroad the armor and the gun steel for the
authorized ships. It would seem desirable that the wants of the Army and
the Navy in this regard should be reasonably met, and that by uniting their
contracts such inducement might be offered as would result in securing the
domestication of these important interests.

The affairs of the postal service show marked and gratifying improvement
during the past year. A particular account of its transactions and
condition is given in the report of the Postmaster-General, which will be
laid before you.

The reduction of the rate of letter postage in 1883, rendering the postal
revenues inadequate to sustain the expenditures, and business depression
also contributing, resulted in an excess of cost for the fiscal year ended
June 30, 1885, of eight and one-third millions of dollars. An additional
check upon receipts by doubling the measure of weight in rating sealed
correspondence and diminishing one-half the charge for newspaper carriage
was imposed by legislation which took effect with the beginning of the past
fiscal year, while the constant demand of our territorial development and
growing population for the extension and increase of mail facilities and
machinery necessitates steady annual advance in outlay, and the careful
estimate of a year ago upon the rates of expenditure then existing
contemplated the unavoidable augmentation of the deficiency in the last
fiscal year by nearly $2,000,000. The anticipated revenue for the last year
failed of realization by about $64,000, but proper measures of economy have
so satisfactorily limited the growth of expenditure that the total
deficiency in fact fell below that of 1885, and at this time the increase
of revenue is in a gaining ratio over the increase of cost, demonstrating
the sufficiency of the present rates of postage ultimately to sustain the
service. This is the more pleasing because our people enjoy now both
cheaper postage proportionably to distances and a vaster and more costly
service than any other upon the globe.

Retrenchment has been effected in the cost of supplies, some expenditures
unwarranted by law have ceased, and the outlays for mail carriage have been
subjected to beneficial scrutiny. At the close of the last fiscal year the
expense of transportation on star routes stood at an annual rate of cost
less by over $560,000 than at the close of the previous year and steamboat
and mail-messenger service at nearly $200,000 less.

The service has been in the meantime enlarged and extended by the
establishment of new offices, increase of routes of carriage, expansion of
carrier-delivery conveniences, and additions to the railway mail
facilities, in accordance with the growing exigencies of the country and
the long-established policy of the Government.

The Postmaster-General calls attention to the existing law for compensating
railroads and expresses the opinion that a method may be devised which will
prove more just to the carriers and beneficial to the Government; and the
subject appears worthy of your early consideration.

The differences which arose during the year with certain of the ocean
steamship companies have terminated by the acquiescence of all in the
policy of the Government approved by the Congress in the postal
appropriation at its last session, and the Department now enjoys the utmost
service afforded by all vessels which sail from our ports upon either
ocean--a service generally adequate to the needs of our intercourse.
Petitions have, however, been presented to the Department by numerous
merchants and manufacturers for the establishment of a direct service to
the Argentine Republic and for semimonthly dispatches to the Empire of
Brazil, and the subject is commended to your consideration. It is an
obvious duty to provide the means of postal communication which our
commerce requires, and with prudent forecast of results the wise extension
of it may lead to stimulating intercourse and become the harbinger of a
profitable traffic which will open new avenues for the disposition of the
products of our industry. The circumstances of the countries at the far
south of our continent are such as to invite our enterprise and afford the
promise of sufficient advantages to justify an unusual effort to bring
about the closer relations which greater freedom of communication would
tend to establish.

I suggest that, as distinguished from a grant or subsidy for the mere
benefit of any line of trade or travel, whatever outlay may be required to
secure additional postal service, necessary and proper and not otherwise
attainable, should be regarded as within the limit of legitimate
compensation for such service.

The extension of the free-delivery service as suggested by the
Postmaster-General has heretofore received my sanction, and it is to be
hoped a suitable enactment may soon be agreed upon.

The request for an appropriation sufficient to enable the general
inspection of fourth-class offices has my approbation.

I renew my approval of the recommendation of the Postmaster-General that
another assistant be provided for the Post-Office Department, and I invite
your attention to the several other recommendations in his report.

The conduct of the Department of Justice for the last fiscal year is fully
detailed in the report of the Attorney-General, and I invite the earnest
attention of the Congress to the same and due consideration of the
recommendations therein contained.

In the report submitted by this officer to the last session of the Congress
he strongly recommended the erection of a penitentiary for the confinement
of prisoners convicted and sentenced in the United States courts, and he
repeats the recommendation in his report for the last year.

This is a matter of very great importance and should at once receive
Congressional action. United States prisoners are now confined in more than
thirty different State prisons and penitentiaries scattered in every part
of the country. They are subjected to nearly as many different modes of
treatment and discipline and are far too much removed from the control and
regulation of the Government. So far as they are entitled to humane
treatment and an opportunity for improvement and reformation, the
Government is responsible to them and society that these things are
forthcoming. But this duty can scarcely be discharged without more absolute
control and direction than is possible under the present system.

Many of our good citizens have interested themselves, with the most
beneficial results, in the question of prison reform. The General
Government should be in a situation, since there must be United States
prisoners, to furnish important aid in this movement, and should be able to
illustrate what may be practically done in the direction of this reform and
to present an example in the treatment and improvement of its prisoners
worthy of imitation.

With prisons under its own control the Government could deal with the
somewhat vexed question of convict labor, so far as its convicts were
concerned, according to a plan of its own adoption, and with due regard to
the rights and interests of our laboring citizens, instead of sometimes
aiding in the operation of a system which causes among them irritation and
discontent.

Upon consideration of this subject it might be thought wise to erect more
than one of these institutions, located in such places as would best
subserve the purposes of convenience and economy in transportation. The
considerable cost of maintaining these convicts as at present, in State
institutions, would be saved by the adoption of the plan proposed, and by
employing them in the manufacture of such articles as were needed for use
by the Government quite a large pecuniary benefit would be realized in
partial return for our outlay.

I again urge a change in the Federal judicial system to meet the wants of
the people and obviate the delays necessarily attending the present
condition of affairs in our courts. All are agreed that something should be
done, and much favor is shown by those well able to advise to the plan
suggested by the Attorney-General at the last session of the Congress and
recommended in my last annual message. This recommendation is here renewed,
together with another made at the same time, touching a change in the
manner of compensating district attorneys and marshals; and the latter
subject is commended to the Congress for its action in the interest of
economy to the Government, and humanity, fairness, and justice to our
people.

The report of the Secretary of the Interior presents a comprehensive
summary of the work of the various branches of the public service connected
with his Department, and the suggestions and recommendations which it
contains for the improvement of the service should receive your careful
consideration.

The exhibit made of the condition of our Indian population and the progress
of the work for their enlightenment, notwithstanding the many
embarrassments which hinder the better administration of this important
branch of the service, is a gratifying and hopeful one.

The funds appropriated for the Indian service for the fiscal year just
passed, with the available income from Indian land and trust moneys,
amounting in all to $7,850,775.12, were ample for the service under the
conditions and restrictions of laws regulating their expenditure. There
remained a balance on hand on June 30, 1886, of $1,660,023.30, of which $
1,337,768.21 are permanent funds for fulfillment of treaties and other like
purposes, and the remainder, $322,255.09, is subject to be carried to the
surplus fund as required by law.

The estimates presented for appropriations for the ensuing fiscal year
amount to $5,608,873.64, or $442,386.20 less than those laid before the
Congress last year.

The present system of agencies, while absolutely necessary and well adapted
for the management of our Indian affairs and for the ends in view when it
was adopted, is in the present stage of Indian management inadequate,
standing alone, for the accomplishment of an object which has become
pressing in its importance--the more rapid transition from tribal
organizations to citizenship of such portions of the Indians as are capable
of civilized life.

When the existing system was adopted, the Indian race was outside of the
limits of organized States and Territories and beyond the immediate reach
and operation of civilization, and all efforts were mainly directed to the
maintenance of friendly relations and the preservation of peace and quiet
on the frontier. All this is now changed. There is no such thing as the
Indian frontier. Civilization, with the busy hum of industry and the
influences of Christianity, surrounds these people at every point. None of
the tribes are outside of the bounds of organized government and society,
except that the Territorial system has not been extended over that portion
of the country known as the Indian Territory. As a race the Indians are no
longer hostile, but may be considered as submissive to the control of the
Government. Few of them only are troublesome. Except the fragments of
several bands, all are now gathered upon reservations.

It is no longer possible for them to subsist by the chase and the
spontaneous productions of the earth.

With an abundance of land, if furnished with the means and implements for
profitable husbandry, their life of entire dependence upon Government
rations from day to day is no longer defensible. Their inclination, long
fostered by a defective system of control, is to cling to the habits and
customs of their ancestors and struggle with persistence against the change
of life which their altered circumstances press upon them. But barbarism
and civilization can not live together. It is impossible that such
incongruous conditions should coexist on the same soil.

They are a portion of our people, are under the authority of our
Government, and have a peculiar claim upon and are entitled to the
fostering care and protection of the nation. The Government can not relieve
itself of this responsibility until they are so far trained and civilized
as to be able wholly to manage and care for themselves. The paths in which
they should walk must be clearly marked out for them, and they must be led
or guided until they are familiar with the way and competent to assume the
duties and responsibilities of our citizenship.

Progress in this great work will continue only at the present slow pace and
at great expense unless the system and methods of management are improved
to meet the changed conditions and urgent demands of the service.

The agents, having general charge and supervision in many cases of more
than 5,000 Indians, scattered over large reservations, and burdened with
the details of accountability for funds and supplies, have time to look
after the industrial training and improvement of a few Indians only. The
many are neglected and remain idle and dependent, conditions not favorable
for progress and civilization.

The compensation allowed these agents and the conditions of the service are
not calculated to secure for the work men who are fitted by ability and
skill to properly plan and intelligently direct the methods best adapted to
produce the most speedy results and permanent benefits.

Hence the necessity for a supplemental agency or system directed to the end
of promoting the general and more rapid transition of the tribes from
habits and customs of barbarism to the ways of civilization.

With an anxious desire to devise some plan of operation by which to secure
the welfare of the Indians and to relieve the Treasury as far as possible
from the support of an idle and dependent population, I recommended in my
previous annual message the passage of a law authorizing the appointment of
a commission as an instrumentality auxiliary to those already established
for the care of the Indians. It was designed that this commission should be
composed of six intelligent and capable persons--three to be detailed from
the Army--having practical ideas upon the subject of the treatment of
Indians and interested in their welfare, and that it should be charged,
under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior, with the management
of such matters of detail as can not with the present organization be
properly and successfully conducted, and which present different phases, as
the Indians themselves differ in their progress, needs, disposition, and
capacity for improvement or immediate self-support.

By the aid of such a commission much unwise and useless expenditure of
money, waste of materials, and unavailing efforts might be avoided; and it
is hoped that this or some measure which the wisdom of Congress may better
devise to supply the deficiency of the present system may receive your
consideration and the appropriate legislation be provided.

The time is ripe for the work of such an agency.

There is less opposition to the education and training of the Indian youth,
as shown by the increased attendance upon the schools, and there is a
yielding tendency for the individual holding of lands. Development and
advancement in these directions are essential, and should have every
encouragement. As the rising generation are taught the language of
civilization and trained in habits of industry they should assume the
duties, privileges, and responsibilities of citizenship.

No obstacle should hinder the location and settlement of any Indian willing
to take land in severalty; on the contrary, the inclination to do so should
be stimulated at all times when proper and expedient. But there is no
authority of law for making allotments on some of the reservations, and on
others the allotments provided for are so small that the Indians, though
ready and desiring to settle down, are not willing to accept such small
areas when their reservations contain ample lands to afford them homesteads
of sufficient size to meet their present and future needs.

These inequalities of existing special laws and treaties should be
corrected and some general legislation on the subject should be provided,
so that the more progressive members of the different tribes may be settled
upon homesteads, and by their example lead others to follow, breaking away
from tribal customs and substituting therefor the love of home, the
interest of the family, and the rule of the state.

The Indian character and nature are such that they are not easily led while
brooding over unadjusted wrongs. This is especially so regarding their
lands. Matters arising from the construction and operation of railroads
across some of the reservations, and claims of title and right of occupancy
set up by white persons to some of the best land within other reservations
require legislation for their final adjustment.

The settlement of these matters will remove many embarrassments to progress
in the work of leading the Indians to the adoption of our institutions and
bringing them under the operation, the influence, and the protection of the
universal laws of our country.

The recommendations of the Secretary of the Interior and the Commissioner
of the General Land Office looking to the better protection of public lands
and of the public surveys, the preservation of national forests, the
adjudication of grants to States and corporations and of private land
claims, and the increased efficiency of the public-land service are
commended to the attention of Congress. To secure the widest distribution
of public lands in limited quantities among settlers for residence and
cultivation, and thus make the greatest number of individual homes, was the
primary object of the public-land legislation in the early days of the
Republic. This system was a simple one. It commenced with an admirable
scheme of public surveys, by which the humblest citizen could identify the
tract upon which he wished to establish his home. The price of lands was
placed within the reach of all the enterprising, industrious, and honest
pioneer citizens of the country. It was soon, however, found that the
object of the laws was perverted, under the system of cash sales, from a
distribution of land among the people to an accumulation of land capital by
wealthy and speculative persons. To check this tendency a preference right
of purchase was given to settlers on the land, a plan which culminated in
the general preemption act of 1841. The foundation of this system was
actual residence and cultivation. Twenty years later the homestead law was
devised to more surely place actual homes in the possession of actual
cultivators of the soil. The land was given without price, the sole
conditions being residence, improvement, and cultivation. Other laws have
followed, each designed to encourage the acquirement and use of land in
limited individual quantities. But in later years these laws, through
vicious administrative methods and under changed conditions of
communication and transportation, have been so evaded and violated that
their beneficent purpose is threatened with entire defeat. The methods of
such evasions and violations are set forth in detail in the reports of the
Secretary of the Interior and Commissioner of the General Land Office. The
rapid appropriation of our public lands without bona fide settlements or
cultivation, and not only without intention of residence, but for the
purpose of their aggregation in large holdings, in many cases in the hands
of foreigners, invites the serious and immediate attention of the
Congress.

The energies of the Land Department have been devoted during the present
Administration to remedy defects and correct abuses in the public-land
service. The results of these efforts are so largely in the nature of
reforms in the processes and methods of our land system as to prevent
adequate estimate; but it appears by a compilation from the reports of the
Commissioner of the General Land Office that the immediate effect in
leading cases which have come to a final termination has been the
restoration to the mass of public lands of 2,750,000 acres; that 2,370,000
acres are embraced in investigations now pending before the Department or
the courts, and that the action of Congress has been asked to effect the
restoration of 2,790,000 acres additional; besides which 4,000,000 acres
have been withheld from reservation and the rights of entry thereon
maintained.

I recommend the repeal of the preemption and timber-culture acts, and that
the homestead laws be so amended as to better secure compliance with their
requirements of residence, improvement, and cultivation for the period of
five years from date of entry, without commutation or provision for
speculative relinquishment. I also recommend the repeal of the desert-land
laws unless it shall be the pleasure of the Congress to so amend these laws
as to render them less liable to abuses. As the chief motive for an evasion
of the laws and the principal cause of their result in land accumulation
instead of land distribution is the facility with which transfers are made
of the right intended to be secured to settlers, it may be deemed advisable
to provide by legislation some guards and checks upon the alienation of
homestead rights and lands covered thereby until patents issue.

Last year an Executive proclamation was issued directing the removal of
fences which inclosed the public domain. Many of these have been removed in
obedience to such order, but much of the public land still remains within
the lines of these unlawful fences. The ingenious methods resorted to in
order to continue these trespasses and the hardihood of the pretenses by
which in some cases such inclosures are justified are fully detailed in the
report of the Secretary of the Interior.

The removal of the fences still remaining which inclose public lands will
be enforced with all the authority and means with which the executive
branch of the Government is or shall be invested by the Congress for that
purpose.

The report of the Commissioner of Pensions contains a detailed and most
satisfactory exhibit of the operations of the Pension Bureau during the
last fiscal year. The amount of work done was the largest in any year since
the organization of the Bureau, and it has been done at less cost than
during the previous year in every division.

On the 30th day of June, 1886, there were 365,783 pensioners on the rolls
of the Bureau.

Since 1861 there have been 1,018,735 applications for pensions filed, of
which 78,834 were based upon service in the War of 1812. There were 621,754
of these applications allowed, including 60,178 to the soldiers of 1812 and
their widows.

The total amount paid for pensions since 1861 is $808,624,811.57.

The number of new pensions allowed during the year ended June 30, 1886, is
40,857, a larger number than has been allowed in any year save one since
1861. The names of 2,229 pensioners which had been previously dropped from
the rolls were restored during the year, and after deducting those dropped
within the same time for various causes a net increase remains for the year
of 20,658 names.

From January 1, 1861, to December 1, 1885, 1,967 private pension acts had
been passed. Since the last-mentioned date, and during the last session of
the Congress, 644 such acts became laws.

It seems to me that no one can examine our pension establishment and its
operations without being convinced that through its instrumentality justice
can be very nearly done to all who are entitled under present laws to the
pension bounty of the Government.

But it is undeniable that cases exist, well entitled to relief, in which
the Pension Bureau is powerless to aid. The really worthy cases of this
class are such as only lack by misfortune the kind or quantity of proof
which the law and regulations of the Bureau require, or which, though their
merit is apparent, for some other reason can not be justly dealt with
through general laws. These conditions fully justify application to the
Congress and special enactments. But resort to the Congress for a special
pension act to overrule the deliberate and careful determination of the
Pension Bureau on the merits or to secure favorable action when it could
not be expected under the most liberal execution of general laws, it must
be admitted opens the door to the allowance of questionable claims and
presents to the legislative and executive branches of the Government
applications concededly not within the law and plainly devoid of merit, but
so surrounded by sentiment and patriotic feeling that they are hard to
resist. I suppose it will not be denied that many claims for pension are
made without merit and that many have been allowed upon fraudulent
representations. This has been declared from the Pension Bureau, not only
in this but in prior Administrations.

The usefulness and the justice of any system for the distribution of
pensions depend upon the equality and uniformity of its operation.

It will be seen from the report of the Commissioner that there are now paid
by the Government 131 different rates of pension.

He estimates from the best information he can obtain that 9,000 of those
who have served in the Army and Navy of the United States are now
supported, in whole or in part, from public funds or by organized
charities, exclusive of those in soldiers' homes under the direction and
control of the Government. Only 13 per cent of these are pensioners, while
of the entire number of men furnished for the late war something like 20
per cent, including their widows and relatives, have been or now are in
receipt of pensions.

The American people, with a patriotic and grateful regard for our
ex-soldiers, too broad and too sacred to be monopolized by any special
advocates, are not only willing but anxious that equal and exact justice
should be done to all honest claimants for pensions. In their sight the
friendless and destitute soldier, dependent on public charity, if otherwise
entitled, has precisely the same right to share in the provision made for
those who fought their country's battles as those better able, through
friends and influence, to push their claims. Every pension that is granted
under our present plan upon any other grounds than actual service and
injury or disease incurred in such service, and every instance of the many
in which pensions are increased on other grounds than the merits of the
claim, work an injustice to the brave and crippled, but poor and
friendless, soldier, who is entirely neglected or who must be content with
the smallest sum allowed under general laws.

There are far too many neighborhoods in which are found glaring cases of
inequality of treatment in the matter of pensions, and they are largely due
to a yielding in the Pension Bureau to importunity on the part of those,
other than the pensioner, who are especially interested, or they arise from
special acts passed for the benefit of individuals.

The men who fought side by side should stand side by side when they
participate in a grateful nation's kind remembrance.

Every consideration of fairness and justice to our ex-soldiers and the
protection of the patriotic instinct of our citizens from perversion and
violation point to the adoption of a pension system broad and comprehensive
enough to cover every contingency, and which shall make unnecessary an
objectionable volume of special legislation.

As long as we adhere to the principle of granting pensions for service, and
disability as the result of the service, the allowance of pensions should
be restricted to cases presenting these features.

Every patriotic heart responds to a tender consideration for those who,
having served their country long and well, are reduced to destitution and
dependence, not as an incident of their service, but with advancing age or
through sickness or misfortune. We are all tempted by the contemplation of
such a condition to supply relief, and are often impatient of the
limitations of public duty. Yielding to no one in the desire to indulge
this feeling of consideration, I can not rid myself of the conviction that
if these ex-soldiers are to be relieved they and their cause are entitled
to the benefit of an enactment under which relief may be claimed as a
right, and that such relief should be granted under the sanction of law,
not in evasion of it; nor should such worthy objects of care, all equally
entitled, be remitted to the unequal operation of sympathy or the tender
mercies of social and political influence, with their unjust
discriminations.

The discharged soldiers and sailors of the country are our fellow-citizens,
and interested with us in the passage and faithful execution of wholesome
laws. They can not be swerved from their duty of citizenship by artful
appeals to their spirit of brotherhood born of common peril and suffering,
nor will they exact as a test of devotion to their welfare a willingness to
neglect public duty in their behalf.

On the 4th of March, 1885, the current business of the Patent Office was,
on an average, five and a half months in arrears, and in several divisions
more than twelve months behind. At the close of the last fiscal year such
current work was but three months in arrears, and it is asserted and
believed that in the next few months the delay in obtaining an examination
of an application for a patent will be but nominal.

The number of applications for patents during the last fiscal year,
including reissues, designs, trade-marks, and labels, equals 40,678, which
is considerably in excess of the number received during any preceding
year.

The receipts of the Patent Office during the year aggregate $1,205,167.80,
enabling the office to turn into the Treasury a surplus revenue, over and
above all expenditures, of about $163,710.30.

The number of patents granted during the last fiscal year, including
reissues, trade-marks, designs, and labels, was 25,619, a number also quite
largely in excess of that of any preceding year.

The report of the Commissioner shows the office to be in a prosperous
condition and constantly increasing in its business. No increase of force
is asked for.

The amount estimated for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1886, was
$890,760. The amount estimated for the year ending June 30, 1887, was
$853,960. The amount estimated for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1888, is
$778,770.

The Secretary of the Interior suggests a change in the plan for the payment
of the indebtedness of the Pacific subsidized roads to the Government. His
suggestion has the unanimous indorsement of the persons selected by the
Government to act as directors of these roads and protect the interests of
the United States in the board of direction. In considering the plan
proposed the sole matters which should be taken into account, in my
opinion, are the situation of the Government as a creditor and the surest
way to secure the payment of the principal and interest of its debt.

By a recent decision of the Supreme Court of the United States it has been
adjudged that the laws of the several States are inoperative to regulate
rates of transportation upon railroads if such regulation interferes with
the rate of carriage from one State into another. This important field of
control and regulation having been thus left entirely unoccupied, the
expediency of Federal action upon the subject is worthy of consideration.

The relations of labor to capital and of laboring men to their employers
are of the utmost concern to every patriotic citizen. When these are
strained and distorted, unjustifiable claims are apt to be insisted upon by
both interests, and in the controversy which results the welfare of all and
the prosperity of the country are jeopardized. Any intervention of the
General Government, within the limits of its constitutional authority, to
avert such a condition should be willingly accorded.

In a special message transmitted to the Congress at its last session I
suggested the enlargement of our present Labor Bureau and adding to its
present functions the power of arbitration in cases where differences arise
between employer and employed. When these differences reach such a stage as
to result in the interruption of commerce between the States, the
application of this remedy by the General Government might be regarded as
entirely within its constitutional powers. And I think we might reasonably
hope that such arbitrators, if carefully selected and if entitled to the
confidence of the parties to be affected, would be voluntarily called to
the settlement of controversies of less extent and not necessarily within
the domain of Federal regulation.

I am of the opinion that this suggestion is worthy the attention of the
Congress.

But after all has been done by the passage of laws, either Federal or
State, to relieve a situation full of solicitude, much more remains to be
accomplished by the reinstatement and cultivation of a true American
sentiment which recognizes the equality of American citizenship. This, in
the light of our traditions and in loyalty to the spirit of our
institutions, would teach that a hearty cooperation on the part of all
interests is the surest path to national greatness and the happiness of all
our people; that capital should, in recognition of the brotherhood of our
citizenship and in a spirit of American fairness, generously accord to
labor its just compensation and consideration, and that contented labor is
capital's best protection and faithful ally. It would teach, too, that the
diverse situations of our people are inseparable from our civilization;
that every citizen should in his sphere be a contributor to the general
good; that capital does not necessarily tend to the oppression of labor,
and that violent disturbances and disorders alienate from their promoters
true American sympathy and kindly feeling.

The Department of Agriculture, representing the oldest and largest of our
national industries, is subserving well the purposes of its organization.
By the introduction of new subjects of farming enterprise and by opening
new sources of agricultural wealth and the dissemination of early
information concerning production and prices it has contributed largely to
the country's prosperity. Through this agency advanced thought and
investigation touching the subjects it has in charge should, among other
things, be practically applied to the home production at a low cost of
articles of food which are now imported from abroad. Such an innovation
will necessarily, of course, in the beginning be within the domain of
intelligent experiment, and the subject in every stage should receive all
possible encouragement from the Government.

The interests of millions of our citizens engaged in agriculture are
involved in an enlargement and improvement of the results of their labor,
and a zealous regard for their welfare should be a willing tribute to those
whose productive returns are a main source of our progress and power.

The existence of pleuro-pneumonia among the cattle of various States has
led to burdensome and in some cases disastrous restrictions in an important
branch of our commerce, threatening to affect the quantity and quality of
our food supply. This is a matter of such importance and of such
far-reaching consequences that I hope it will engage the serious attention
of the Congress, to the end that such a remedy may be applied as the limits
of a constitutional delegation of power to the General Government will
permit.

I commend to the consideration of the Congress the report of the
Commissioner and his suggestions concerning the interest intrusted to his
care.

The continued operation of the law relating to our civil service has added
the most convincing proofs of its necessity and usefulness. It is a fact
worthy of note that every public officer who has a just idea of his duty to
the people testifies to the value of this reform. Its staunchest, friends
are found among those who understand it best, and its warmest supporters
are those who are restrained and protected by its requirements.

The meaning of such restraint and protection is not appreciated by those
who want places under the Government regardless of merit and efficiency,
nor by those who insist that the selection of such places should rest upon
a proper credential showing active partisan work. They mean to public
officers, if not their lives, the only opportunity afforded them to attend
to public business, and they mean to the good people of the country the
better performance of the work of their Government.

It is exceedingly strange that the scope and nature of this reform are so
little understood and that so many things not included within its plan are
called by its name. When cavil yields more fully to examination, the system
will have large additions to the number of its friends.

Our civil-service reform may be imperfect in some of its details; it may be
misunderstood and opposed; it may not always be faithfully applied; its
designs may sometimes miscarry through mistake or willful intent; it may
sometimes tremble under the assaults of its enemies or languish under the
misguided zeal of impracticable friends; but if the people of this country
ever submit to the banishment of its underlying principle from the
operation of their Government they will abandon the surest guaranty of the
safety and success of American institutions.

I invoke for this reform the cheerful and ungrudging support of the
Congress. I renew my recommendation made last year that the salaries of the
Commissioners be made equal to other officers of the Government having like
duties and responsibilities, and I hope that such reasonable appropriations
may be made as will enable them to increase the usefulness of the cause
they have in charge.

I desire to call the attention of the Congress to a plain duty which the
Government owes to the depositors in the Freedman's Savings and Trust
Company.

This company was chartered by the Congress for the benefit of the most
illiterate and humble of our people, and with the intention of encouraging
in them industry and thrift. Most of its branches were presided over by
officers holding the commissions and clothed in the uniform of the United
States. These and other circumstances reasonably, I think, led these simple
people to suppose that the invitation to deposit their hard-earned savings
in this institution implied an undertaking on the part of their Government
that their money should be safely kept for them.

When this company failed, it was liable in the sum of $2,939,925.22 to
61,131 depositors. Dividends amounting in the aggregate to 62 per cent have
been declared, and the sum called for and paid of such dividends seems to
be $1,648,181.72. This sum deducted from the entire amount of deposits
leaves $1,291,744.50 still unpaid. Past experience has shown that quite a
large part of this sum will not be called for. There are assets still on
hand amounting to the estimated sum of $16,000.

I think the remaining 38 per cent of such of these deposits as have
claimants should be paid by the Government, upon principles of equity and
fairness.

The report of the commissioner, soon to be laid before Congress, will give
more satisfactory details on this subject.

The control of the affairs of the District of Columbia having been placed
in the hands of purely executive officers, while the Congress still retains
all legislative authority relating to its government, it becomes my duty to
make known the most pressing needs of the District and recommend their
consideration.

The laws of the District appear to be in an uncertain and unsatisfactory
condition, and their codification or revision is much needed.

During the past year one of the bridges leading from the District to the
State of Virginia became unfit for use, and travel upon it was forbidden.
This leads me to suggest that the improvement of all the bridges crossing
the Potomac and its branches from the city of Washington is worthy the
attention of Congress.

The Commissioners of the District represent that the laws regulating the
sale of liquor and granting licenses therefor should be at once amended,
and that legislation is needed to consolidate, define, and enlarge the
scope and powers of charitable and penal institutions within the District.

I suggest that the Commissioners be clothed with the power to make, within
fixed limitations, police regulations. I believe this power granted and
carefully guarded would tend to subserve the good order of the
municipality.

It seems that trouble still exists growing out of the occupation of the
streets and avenues by certain railroads having their termini in the city.
It is very important that such laws should be enacted upon this subject as
will secure to the railroads all the facilities they require for the
transaction of their business and at the same time protect citizens from
injury to their persons or property.

The Commissioners again complain that the accommodations afforded them for
the necessary offices for District business and for the safe-keeping of
valuable books and papers are entirely insufficient. I recommend that this
condition of affairs be remedied by the Congress, and that suitable
quarters be furnished for the needs of the District government.

In conclusion I earnestly invoke such wise action on the part of the
people's legislators as will subserve the public good and demonstrate
during the remaining days of the Congress as at present organized its
ability and inclination to so meet the people's needs that it shall be
gratefully remembered by an expectant constituency.

1887:
To the Congress of the United States:

You are confronted at the threshold of your legislative duties with a
condition of the national finances which imperatively demands immediate and
careful consideration.

The amount of money annually exacted, through the operation of present
laws, from the industries and necessities of the people largely exceeds the
sum necessary to meet the expenses of the Government.

When we consider that the theory of our institutions guarantees to every
citizen the full enjoyment of all the fruits of his industry and
enterprise, with only such deduction as may be his share toward the careful
and economical maintenance of the Government which protects him, it is
plain that the exaction of more than this is indefensible extortion and a
culpable betrayal of American fairness and justice. This wrong inflicted
upon those who bear the burden of national taxation, like other wrongs,
multiplies a brood of evil consequences. The public Treasury, which should
only exist as a conduit conveying the people's tribute to its legitimate
objects of expenditure, becomes a hoarding place for money needlessly
withdrawn from trade and the people's use, thus crippling our national
energies, suspending our country's development, preventing investment in
productive enterprise, threatening financial disturbance, and inviting
schemes of public plunder.

This condition of our Treasury is not altogether new, and it has more than
once of late been submitted to the people's representatives in the
Congress, who alone can apply a remedy. And yet the situation still
continues, with aggravated incidents, more than ever presaging financial
convulsion and widespread disaster.

It will not do to neglect this situation because its dangers are not now
palpably imminent and apparent. They exist none the less certainly, and
await the unforeseen and unexpected occasion when suddenly they will be
precipitated upon us.

On the 30th day of June, 1885, the excess of revenues over public
expenditures, after complying with the annual requirement of the
sinking-fund act, was $17,859,735.84; during the year ended June 30, 1886,
such excess amounted to $49,405,545.20, and during the year ended June 30,
1887, it reached the sum of $55,567,849.54.

The annual contributions to the sinking fund during the three years above
specified, amounting in the aggregate to $138,058,320.94, and deducted from
the surplus as stated, were made by calling in for that purpose outstanding
3 per cent bonds of the Government. During the six months prior to June 30,
1887, the surplus revenue had grown so large by repeated accumulations, and
it was feared the withdrawal of this great sum of money needed by the
people would so affect the business of the country, that the sum of
$79,864,100 of such surplus was applied to the payment of the principal and
interest of the 3 per cent bonds still outstanding, and which were then
payable at the option of the Government. The precarious condition of
financial affairs among the people still needing relief, immediately after
the 30th day of June, 1887, the remainder of the 3 per cent bonds then
outstanding, amounting with principal and interest to the sum of
$18,877,500, were called in and applied to the sinking-fund contribution
for the current fiscal year. Notwithstanding these operations of the
Treasury Department, representations of distress in business circles not
only continued, but increased, and absolute peril seemed at hand. In these
circumstances the contribution to the sinking fund for the current fiscal
year was at once completed by the expenditure of $27,684,283.55 in the
purchase of Government bonds not yet due bearing 4 and 41/2 per cent
interest, the premium paid thereon averaging about 24 per cent for the
former and 8 per cent for the latter. In addition to this, the interest
accruing during the current year upon the outstanding bonded indebtedness
of the Government was to some extent anticipated, and banks selected as
depositories of public money were permitted to somewhat increase their
deposits.

While the expedients thus employed to release to the people the money lying
idle in the Treasury served to avert immediate danger, our surplus revenues
have continued to accumulate, the excess for the present year amounting on
the 1st day of December to $55,258,701.19, and estimated to reach the sum
of $113,000,000 on the 30th of June next, at which date it is expected that
this sum, added to prior accumulations, will swell the surplus in the
Treasury to $140,000,000.

There seems to be no assurance that, with such a withdrawal from use of the
people's circulating medium, our business community may not in the near
future be subjected to the same distress which was quite lately produced
from the same cause. And while the functions of our National Treasury
should be few and simple, and while its best condition would be reached, I
believe, by its entire disconnection with private business interests, yet
when, by a perversion of its purposes, it idly holds money uselessly
subtracted from the channels of trade, there seems to be reason for the
claim that some legitimate means should be devised by the Government to
restore in an emergency, without waste or extravagance, such money to its
place among the people.

If such an emergency arises, there now exists no clear and undoubted
executive power of relief. Heretofore the redemption of 3 per cent bonds,
which were payable at the option of the Government, has afforded a means
for the disbursement of the excess of our revenues; but these bonds have
all been retired, and there are no bonds outstanding the payment of which
we have a right to insist upon. The contribution to the sinking fund which
furnishes the occasion for expenditure in the purchase of bonds has been
already made for the current year, so that there is no outlet in that
direction.

In the present state of legislation the only pretense of any existing
executive power to restore at this time any part of our surplus revenues to
the people by its expenditure consists in the supposition that the
Secretary of the Treasury may enter the market and purchase the bonds of
the Government not yet due, at a rate of premium to be agreed upon. The
only provision of law from which such a power could be derived is found in
an appropriation bill passed a number of years ago, and it is subject to
the suspicion that it was intended as temporary and limited in its
application, instead of conferring a continuing discretion and authority.
No condition ought to exist which would justify the grant of power to a
single official, upon his judgment of its necessity, to withhold from or
release to the business of the people, in an unusual manner, money held in
the Treasury, and thus affect at his will the financial situation of the
country; and if it is deemed wise to lodge in the Secretary of the Treasury
the authority in the present juncture to purchase bonds, it should be
plainly vested, and provided, as far as possible, with such checks and
limitations as will define this official's right and discretion and at the
same time relieve him from undue responsibility.

In considering the question of purchasing bonds as a means of restoring to
circulation the surplus money accumulating in the Treasury, it should be
borne in mind that premiums must of course be paid upon such purchase, that
there may be a large part of these bonds held as investments which can not
be purchased at any price, and that combinations among holders who are
willing to sell may unreasonably enhance the cost of such bonds to the
Government.

It has been suggested that the present bonded debt might be refunded at a
less rate of interest and the difference between the old and new security
paid in cash, thus finding use for the surplus in the Treasury. The success
of this plan, it is apparent, must depend upon the volition of the holders
of the present bonds; and it is not entirely certain that the inducement
which must be offered them would result in more financial benefit to the
Government than the purchase of bonds, while the latter proposition would
reduce the principal of the debt by actual payment instead of extending
it.

The proposition to deposit the money held by the Government in banks
throughout the country for use by the people is, it seems to me,
exceedingly objectionable in principle, as establishing too close a
relationship between the operations of the Government Treasury and the
business of the country and too extensive a commingling of their money,
thus fostering an unnatural reliance in private business upon public funds.
If this scheme should be adopted, it should only be done as a temporary
expedient to meet an urgent necessity. Legislative and executive effort
should generally be in the opposite direction, and should have a tendency
to divorce, as much and as fast as can be safely done, the Treasury
Department from private enterprise.

Of course it is not expected that unnecessary and extravagant
appropriations will be made for the purpose of avoiding the accumulation of
an excess of revenue. Such expenditure, besides the demoralization of all
just conceptions of public duty which it entails, stimulates a habit of
reckless improvidence not in the least consistent with the mission of our
people or the high and beneficent purposes of our Government.

I have deemed it my duty to thus bring to the knowledge of my countrymen,
as well as to the attention of their representatives charged with the
responsibility of legislative relief, the gravity of our financial
situation. The failure of the Congress heretofore to provide against the
dangers which it was quite evident the very nature of the difficulty must
necessarily produce caused a condition of financial distress and
apprehension since your last adjournment which taxed to the utmost all the
authority and expedients within executive control; and these appear now to
be exhausted. If disaster results from the continued inaction of Congress,
the responsibility must rest where it belongs.

Though the situation thus far considered is fraught with danger which
should be fully realized, and though it presents features of wrong to the
people as well as peril to the country, it is but a result growing out of a
perfectly palpable and apparent cause, constantly reproducing the same
alarming circumstances--a congested National Treasury and a depleted
monetary condition in the business of the country. It need hardly be stated
that while the present situation demands a remedy, we can only be saved
from a like predicament in the future by the removal of its cause.

Our scheme of taxation, by means of which this needless surplus is taken
from the people and put into the public Treasury, consists of a tariff or
duty levied upon importations from abroad and internal-revenue taxes levied
upon the consumption of tobacco and spirituous and malt liquors. It must be
conceded that none of the things subjected to internal-revenue taxation
are, strictly speaking, necessaries. There appears to be no just complaint
of this taxation by the consumers of these articles, and there seems to be
nothing so well able to bear the burden without hardship to any portion of
the people.

But our present tariff laws, the vicious, inequitable, and illogical source
of unnecessary taxation, ought to be at once revised and amended. These
laws, as their primary and plain effect, raise the price to consumers of
all articles imported and subject to duty by precisely the sum paid for
such duties. Thus the amount of the duty measures the tax paid by those who
purchase for use these imported articles. Many of these things, however,
are raised or manufactured in our own country, and the duties now levied
upon foreign goods and products are called protection to these home
manufactures, because they render it possible for those of our people who
are manufacturers to make these taxed articles and sell them for a price
equal to that demanded for the imported goods that have paid customs duty.
So it happens that while comparatively a few use the imported articles,
millions of our people, who never used and never saw any of the foreign
products, purchase and use things of the same kind made in this country,
and pay therefor nearly or quite the same enhanced price which the duty
adds to the imported articles. Those who buy imports pay the duty charged
thereon into the public Treasury, but the great majority of our citizens,
who buy domestic articles of the same class, pay a sum at least
approximately equal to this duty to the home manufacturer. This reference
to the operation of our tariff laws is not made by way of instruction, but
in order that we may be constantly reminded of the manner in which they
impose a burden upon those who consume domestic products as well as those
who consume imported articles, and thus create a tax upon all our people.

It is not proposed to entirely relieve the country of this taxation. It
must be extensively continued as the source of the Government's income; and
in a readjustment of our tariff the interests of American labor engaged in
manufacture should be carefully considered, as well as the preservation of
our manufacturers. It may be called protection or by any other name, but
relief from the hardships and dangers of our present tariff laws should be
devised with especial precaution against imperiling the existence of our
manufacturing interests. But this existence should not mean a condition
which, without regard to the public welfare or a national exigency, must
always insure the realization of immense profits instead of moderately
profitable returns. As the volume and diversity of our national activities
increase, new recruits are added to those who desire a continuation of the
advantages which they conceive the present system of tariff taxation
directly affords them. So stubbornly have all efforts to reform the present
condition been resisted by those of our fellow-citizens thus engaged that
they can hardly complain of the suspicion, entertained to a certain extent,
that there exists an organized combination all along the line to maintain
their advantage.

We are in the midst of centennial celebrations, and with becoming pride we
rejoice in American skill and ingenuity, in American energy and enterprise,
and in the wonderful natural advantages and resources developed by a
century's national growth. Yet when an attempt is made to justify a scheme
which permits a tax to be laid upon every consumer in the land for the
benefit of our manufacturers, quite beyond a reasonable demand for
governmental regard, it suits the purposes of advocacy to call our
manufactures infant industries still needing the highest and greatest
degree of favor and fostering care that can be wrung from Federal
legislation.

It is also said that the increase in the price of domestic manufactures
resulting from the present tariff is necessary in order that higher wages
may be paid to our workingmen employed in manufactories than are paid for
what is called the pauper labor of Europe. All will acknowledge the force
of an argument which involves the welfare and liberal compensation of our
laboring people. Our labor is honorable in the eyes of every American
citizen; and as it lies at the foundation of our development and progress,
it is entitled, without affectation or hypocrisy, to the utmost regard. The
standard of our laborers' life should not be measured by that of any other
country less favored, and they are entitled to their full share of all our
advantages.

By the last census it is made to appear that of the 17,392,099 of our
population engaged in all kinds of industries 7,670,493 are employed in
agriculture, 4,074,238 in professional and personal service (2,934,876 of
whom are domestic servants and laborers), while 1,810,256 are employed in
trade and transportation and 3,837,112 are classed as employed in
manufacturing and mining.

For present purposes, however, the last number given should be considerably
reduced. Without attempting to enumerate all, it will be conceded that
there should be deducted from those which it includes 375,143 carpenters
and joiners, 285,401 milliners, dressmakers, and seamstresses, 172,726
blacksmiths, 133,756 tailors and tailoresses, 102,473 masons, 76,241
butchers, 41,309 bakers, 22,083 plasterers, and 4,891 engaged in
manufacturing agricultural implements, amounting in the aggregate to
1,214,023, leaving 2,623,089 persons employed in such manufacturing
industries as are claimed to be benefited by a high tariff.

To these the appeal is made to save their employment and maintain their
wages by resisting a change. There should be no disposition to answer such
suggestions by the allegation that they are in a minority among those who
labor, and therefore should forego an advantage in the interest of low
prices for the majority. Their compensation, as it may be affected by the
operation of tariff laws, should at all times be scrupulously kept in view;
and yet with slight reflection they will not overlook the fact that they
are consumers with the rest; that they too have their own wants and those
of their families to supply from their earnings, and that the price of the
necessaries of life, as well as the amount of their wages, will regulate
the measure of their welfare and comfort.

But the reduction of taxation demanded should be so measured as not to
necessitate or justify either the loss of employment by the workingman or
the lessening of his wages; and the profits still remaining to the
manufacturer after a necessary readjustment should furnish no excuse for
the sacrifice of the interests of his employees, either in their
opportunity to work or in the diminution of their compensation. Nor can the
worker in manufactures fail to understand that while a high tariff is
claimed to be necessary to allow the payment of remunerative wages, it
certainly results in a very large increase in the price of nearly all sorts
of manufactures, which, in almost countless forms, he needs for the use of
himself and his family. He receives at the desk of his employer his wages,
and perhaps before he reaches his home is obliged, in a purchase for family
use of an article which embraces his own labor, to return in the payment of
the increase in price which the tariff permits the hard-earned compensation
of many days of toil.

The farmer and the agriculturist, who manufacture nothing, but who pay the
increased price which the tariff imposes upon every agricultural implement,
upon all he wears, and upon all he uses and owns, except the increase of
his flocks and herds and such things as his husbandry produces from the
soil, is invited to aid in maintaining the present situation; and he is
told that a high duty on imported wool is necessary for the benefit of
those who have sheep to shear, in order that the price of their wool may be
increased. They, of course, are not reminded that the farmer who has no
sheep is by this scheme obliged, in his purchases of clothing and woolen
goods, to pay a tribute to his fellow-farmer as well as to the manufacturer
and merchant, nor is any mention made of the fact that the sheep owners
themselves and their households must wear clothing and use other articles
manufactured from the wool they sell at tariff prices, and thus as
consumers must return their share of this increased price to the
tradesman.

I think it may be fairly assumed that a large proportion of the sheep owned
by the farmers throughout the country are found in small flocks, numbering
from twenty-five to fifty. The duty on the grade of imported wool which
these sheep yield is 10 cents each pound if of the value of 30 cents or
less and 12 cents if of the value of more than 30 cents. If the liberal
estimate of 6 pounds be allowed for each fleece, the duty thereon would be
60 or 72 cents; and this may be taken as the utmost enhancement of its
price to the farmer by reason of this duty. Eighteen dollars would thus
represent the increased price of the wool from twenty-five sheep and $36
that from the wool of fifty sheep; and at present values this addition
would amount to about one-third of its price. If upon its sale the farmer
receives this or a less tariff profit, the wool leaves his hands charged
with precisely that sum, which in all its changes will adhere to it until
it reaches the consumer. When manufactured into cloth and other goods and
material for use, its cost is not only increased to the extent of the
farmer's tariff profit, but a further sum has been added for the benefit of
the manufacturer under the operation of other tariff laws. In the meantime
the day arrives when the farmer finds it necessary to purchase woolen goods
and material to clothe himself and family for the winter. When he faces the
tradesman for that purpose, he discovers that he is obliged not only to
return in the way of increased prices his tariff profit on the wool he
sold, and which then perhaps lies before him in manufactured form, but that
he must add a considerable sum thereto to meet a further increase in cost
caused by a tariff duty on the manufacture. Thus in the end he is aroused
to the fact that he has paid upon a moderate purchase, as a result of the
tariff scheme, which when he sold his wool seemed so profitable, an
increase in price more than sufficient to sweep away all the tariff profit
he received upon the wool he produced and sold.

When the number of farmers engaged in wool raising is compared with all the
farmers in the country and the small proportion they bear to our population
is considered; when it is made apparent that in the case of a large part of
those who own sheep the benefit of the present tariff on wool is illusory;
and, above all, when it must be conceded that the increase of the cost of
living caused by such tariff becomes a burden upon those with moderate
means and the poor, the employed and unemployed, the sick and well, and the
young and old, and that it constitutes a tax which with relentless grasp is
fastened upon the clothing of every man, woman, and child in the land,
reasons are suggested why the removal or reduction of this duty should be
included in a revision of our tariff laws.

In speaking of the increased cost to the consumer of our home manufactures
resulting from a duty laid upon imported articles of the same description,
the fact is not ever looked that competition among our domestic producers
sometimes has the effect of keeping the price of their products below the
highest limit allowed by such duty. But it is notorious that this
competition is too often strangled by combinations quite prevalent at this
time, and frequently called trusts, which have for their object the
regulation of the supply and price of commodities made and sold by members
of the combination. The people can hardly hope for any consideration in the
operation of these selfish schemes.

If, however, in the absence of such combination, a healthy and free
competition reduces the price of any particular dutiable article of home
production below the limit which it might otherwise reach under our tariff
laws, and if with such reduced price its manufacture continues to thrive,
it is entirely evident that one thing has been discovered which should be
carefully scrutinized in an effort to reduce taxation.

The necessity of combination to maintain the price of any commodity to the
tariff point furnishes proof that someone is willing to accept lower prices
for such commodity and that such prices are remunerative; and lower prices
produced by competition prove the same thing. Thus where either of these
conditions exists a case would seem to be presented for an easy reduction
of taxation.

The considerations which have been presented touching our tariff laws are
intended only to enforce an earnest recommendation that the surplus
revenues of the Government be prevented by the reduction of our customs
duties, and at the same time to emphasize a suggestion that in
accomplishing this purpose we may discharge a double duty to our people by
granting to them a measure of relief from tariff taxation in quarters where
it is most needed and from sources where it can be most fairly and justly
accorded.

Nor can the presentation made of such considerations be with any degree of
fairness regarded as evidence of unfriendliness toward our manufacturing
interests or of any lack of appreciation of their value and importance.

These interests constitute a leading and most substantial element of our
national greatness and furnish the proud proof of our country's progress.
But if in the emergency that presses upon us our manufacturers are asked to
surrender something for the public good and to avert disaster, their
patriotism, as well as a grateful recognition of advantages already
afforded, should lead them to willing cooperation. No demand is made that
they shall forego all the benefits of governmental regard; but they can not
fail to be admonished of their duty, as well as their enlightened
self-interest and safety, when they are reminded of the fact that financial
panic and collapse, to which the present condition tends, afford no greater
shelter or protection to our manufactures than to other important
enterprises. Opportunity for safe, careful, and deliberate reform is now
offered; and none of us should be unmindful of a time when an abused and
irritated people, heedless of those who have resisted timely and reasonable
relief, may insist upon a radical and sweeping rectification of their
wrongs.

The difficulty attending a wise and fair revision of our tariff laws is not
underestimated. It will require on the part of the Congress great labor and
care, and especially a broad and national contemplation of the subject and
a patriotic disregard of such local and selfish claims as are unreasonable
and reckless of the welfare of the entire country.

Under our present laws more than 4,000 articles are subject to duty. Many
of these do not in any way compete with our own manufactures, and many are
hardly worth attention as subjects of revenue. A considerable reduction can
be made in the aggregate by adding them to the free list. The taxation of
luxuries presents no features of hardship; but the necessaries of life used
and consumed by all the people, the duty upon which adds to the cost of
living in every home, should be greatly cheapened.

The radical reduction of the duties imposed upon raw material used in
manufactures, or its free importation, is of course an important factor in
any effort to reduce the price of these necessaries. It would not only
relieve them from the increased cost caused by the tariff on such material,
but the manufactured product being thus cheapened that part of the tariff
now laid upon such product, as a compensation to our manufacturers for the
present price of raw material, could be accordingly modified. Such
reduction or free importation would serve besides to largely reduce the
revenue. It is not apparent how such a change can have any injurious effect
upon our manufacturers. On the contrary, it would appear to give them a
better chance in foreign markets with the manufacturers of other countries,
who cheapen their wares by free material. Thus our people might have the
opportunity of extending their sales beyond the limits of home consumption,
saving them from the depression, interruption in business, and loss caused
by a glutted domestic market and affording their employees more certain and
steady labor, with its resulting quiet and contentment.

The question thus imperatively presented for solution should be approached
in a spirit higher than partisanship and considered in the light of that
regard for patriotic duty which should characterize the action of those
intrusted with the weal of a confiding people. But the obligation to
declared party policy and principle is not wanting to urge prompt and
effective action. Both of the great political parties now represented in
the Government have by repeated and authoritative declarations condemned
the condition of our laws which permit the collection from the people of
unnecessary revenue, and have in the most solemn manner promised its
correction; and neither as citizens nor partisans are our countrymen in a
mood to condone the deliberate violation of these pledges.

Our progress toward a wise conclusion will not be improved by dwelling upon
the theories of protection and free trade. This savors too much of bandying
epithets. It is a condition which confronts us, not a theory. Relief from
this condition may involve a slight reduction of the advantages which we
award our home productions, but the entire withdrawal of such advantages
should not be contemplated. The question of free trade is absolutely
irrelevant, and the persistent claim made in certain quarters that all the
efforts to relieve the people from unjust and unnecessary taxation are
schemes of so-called free traders is mischievous and far removed from any
consideration for the public good.

The simple and plain duty which we owe the people is to reduce taxation to
the necessary expenses of an economical operation of the Government and to
restore to the business of the country the money which we hold in the
Treasury through the perversion of governmental powers. These things can
and should be done with safety to all our industries, without danger to the
opportunity for remunerative labor which our workingmen need, and with
benefit to them and all our people by cheapening their means of subsistence
and increasing the measure of their comforts.

The Constitution provides that the President "shall from time to time give
to the Congress information of the state of the Union." It has been the
custom of the Executive, in compliance with this provision, to annually
exhibit to the Congress, at the opening of its session, the general
condition of the country, and to detail with some particularity the
operations of the different Executive Departments. It would be especially
agreeable to follow this course at the present time and to call attention
to the valuable accomplishments of these Departments during the last fiscal
year; but I am so much impressed with the paramount importance of the
subject to which this communication has thus far been devoted that I shall
forego the addition of any other topic, and only urge upon your immediate
consideration the "state of the Union" as shown in the present condition of
our Treasury and our general fiscal situation, upon which every element of
our safety and prosperity depends.

The reports of the heads of Departments, which will be submitted, contain
full and explicit information touching the transaction of the business
intrusted to them and such recommendations relating to legislation in the
public interest as they deem advisable. I ask for these reports and
recommendations the deliberate examination and action of the legislative
branch of the Government.

There are other subjects not embraced in the departmental reports demanding
legislative consideration, and which I should be glad to submit. Some of
them, however, have been earnestly presented in previous messages, and as
to them I beg leave to repeat prior recommendations.

As the law makes no provision for any report from the Department of State,
a brief history of the transactions of that important Department, together
with other matters which it may hereafter be deemed essential to commend to
the attention of the Congress, may furnish the occasion for a future
communication.

1888:
To the Congress of the United States:

As you assemble for the discharge of the duties you have assumed as the
representatives of a free and generous people, your meeting is marked by an
interesting and impressive incident. With the expiration of the present
session of the Congress the first century of our constitutional existence
as a nation will be completed.

Our survival for one hundred years is not sufficient to assure us that we
no longer have dangers to fear in the maintenance, with all its promised
blessings, of a government rounded upon the freedom of the people. The time
rather admonishes us to soberly inquire whether in the past we have always
closely kept in the course of safety, and whether we have before us a way
plain and clear which leads to happiness and perpetuity.

When the experiment of our Government was undertaken, the chart adopted for
our guidance was the Constitution. Departure from the lines there laid down
is failure. It is only by a strict adherence to the direction they indicate
and by restraint within the limitations they fix that we can furnish proof
to the world of the fitness of the American people for self-government.

The equal and exact justice of which we boast as the underlying principle
of our institutions should not be confined to the relations of our citizens
to each other. The Government itself is under bond to the American people
that in the exercise of its functions and powers it will deal with the body
of our citizens in a manner scrupulously honest and fair and absolutely
just. It has agreed that American citizenship shall be the only credential
necessary to justify the claim of equality before the law, and that no
condition in life shall give rise to discrimination in the treatment of the
people by their Government.

The citizen of our Republic in its early days rigidly insisted upon full
compliance with the letter of this bond, and saw stretching out before him
a clear field for individual endeavor. His tribute to the support of his
Government was measured by the cost of its economical maintenance, and he
was secure in the enjoyment of the remaining recompense of his steady and
contented toil. In those days the frugality of the people was stamped upon
their Government, and was enforced by the free, thoughtful, and intelligent
suffrage of the citizen. Combinations, monopolies, and aggregations of
capital were either avoided or sternly regulated and restrained. The pomp
and glitter of governments less free offered no temptation and presented no
delusion to the plain people who, side by side, in friendly competition,
wrought for the ennoblement and dignity of man, for the solution of the
problem of free government, and for the achievement of the grand destiny
awaiting the land which God had given them.

A century has passed. Our cities are the abiding places of wealth and
luxury; our manufactories yield fortunes never dreamed of by the fathers of
the Republic; our business men are madly striving in the race for riches,
and immense aggregations of capital outrun the imagination in the magnitude
of their undertakings.

We view with pride and satisfaction this bright picture of our country's
growth and prosperity, while only a closer scrutiny develops a somber
shading. Upon more careful inspection we find the wealth and luxury of our
cities mingled with poverty and wretchedness and unremunerative toil. A
crowded and constantly increasing urban population suggests the
impoverishment of rural sections and discontent with agricultural pursuits.
The farmer's son, not satisfied with his father's simple and laborious
life, joins the eager chase for easily acquired wealth.

We discover that the fortunes realized by our manufacturers are no longer
solely the reward of sturdy industry and enlightened foresight, but that
they result from the discriminating favor of the Government and are largely
built upon undue exactions from the masses of our people. The gulf between
employers and the employed is constantly widening, and classes are rapidly
forming, one comprising the very rich and powerful, while in another are
found the toiling poor.

As we view the achievements of aggregated capital, we discover the
existence of trusts, combinations, and monopolies, while the citizen is
struggling far in the rear or is trampled to death beneath an iron heel.
Corporations, which should be the carefully restrained creatures of the law
and the servants of the people, are fast becoming the people's masters.

Still congratulating ourselves upon the wealth and prosperity of our
country and complacently contemplating every incident of change inseparable
from these conditions, it is our duty as patriotic citizens to inquire at
the present stage of our progress how the bond of the Government made with
the people has been kept and performed.

Instead of limiting the tribute drawn from our citizens to the necessities
of its economical administration, the Government persists in exacting from
the substance of the people millions which, unapplied and useless, lie
dormant in its Treasury. This flagrant injustice and this breach of faith
and obligation add to extortion the danger attending the diversion of the
currency of the country from the legitimate channels of business.

Under the same laws by which these results are produced the Government
permits many millions more to be added to the cost of the living of our
people and to be taken from our consumers, which unreasonably swell the
profits of a small but powerful minority.

The people must still be taxed for the support of the Government under the
operation of tariff laws. But to the extent that the mass of our citizens
are inordinately burdened beyond any useful public purpose and for the
benefit of a favored few, the Government, under pretext of an exercise of
its taxing power, enters gratuitously into partnership with these
favorites, to their advantage and to the injury of a vast majority of our
people.

This is not equality before the law.

The existing situation is injurious to the health of our entire body
politic. It stifles in those for whose benefit it is permitted all
patriotic love of country, and substitutes in its place selfish greed and
grasping avarice. Devotion to American citizenship for its own sake and for
what it should accomplish as a motive to our nation's advancement and the
happiness of all our people is displaced by the assumption that the
Government, instead of being the embodiment of equality, is but an
instrumentality through which especial and individual advantages are to be
gained.

The arrogance of this assumption is unconcealed. It appears in the sordid
disregard of all but personal interests, in the refusal to abate for the
benefit of others one iota of selfish advantage, and in combinations to
perpetuate such advantages through efforts to control legislation and
improperly influence the suffrages of the people.

The grievances of those not included within the circle of these
beneficiaries, when fully realized, will surely arouse irritation and
discontent. Our farmers, long suffering and patient, struggling in the race
of life with the hardest and most unremitting toil, will not fail to see,
in spite of misrepresentations and misleading fallacies, that they are
obliged to accept such prices for their products as are fixed in foreign
markets where they compete with the farmers of the world; that their lands
are declining in value while their debts increase, and that without
compensating favor they are forced by the action of the Government to pay
for the benefit of others such enhanced prices for the things they need
that the scanty returns of their labor fail to furnish their support or
leave no margin for accumulation.

Our workingmen, enfranchised from all delusions and no longer frightened by
the cry that their wages are endangered by a just revision of our tariff
laws, will reasonably demand through such revision steadier employment,
cheaper means of living in their homes, freedom for themselves and their
children from the doom of perpetual servitude, and an open door to their
advancement beyond the limits of a laboring class. Others of our citizens,
whose comforts and expenditures are measured by moderate salaries and fixed
incomes, will insist upon the fairness and justice of cheapening the cost
of necessaries for themselves and their families.

When to the selfishness of the beneficiaries of unjust discrimination under
our laws there shall be added the discontent of those who suffer from such
discrimination, we will realize the fact that the beneficent purposes of
our Government, dependent upon the patriotism and contentment of our
people, are endangered.

Communism is a hateful thing and a menace to peace and organized
government; but the communism of combined wealth and capital, the outgrowth
of overweening cupidity and selfishness, which insidiously undermines the
justice and integrity of free institutions, is not less dangerous than the
communism of oppressed poverty and toil, which, exasperated by injustice
and discontent, attacks with wild disorder the citadel of rule.

He mocks the people who proposes that the Government shall protect the rich
and that they in turn will care for the laboring poor. Any intermediary
between the people and their Government or the least delegation of the care
and protection the Government owes to the humblest citizen in the land
makes the boast of free institutions a glittering delusion and the
pretended boon of American citizenship a shameless imposition.

A just and sensible revision of our tariff laws should be made for the
relief of those of our countrymen who suffer under present conditions. Such
a revision should receive the support of all who love that justice and
equality due to American citizenship; of all who realize that in this
justice and equality our Government finds its strength and its power to
protect the citizen and his property; of all who believe that the contented
competence and comfort of many accord better with the spirit of our
institutions than colossal fortunes unfairly gathered in the hands of a
few; of all who appreciate that the forbearance and fraternity among our
people, which recognize the value of every American interest, are the
surest guaranty of our national progress, and of all who desire to see the
products of American skill and ingenuity in every market of the world, with
a resulting restoration of American commerce.

The necessity of the reduction of our revenues is so apparent as to be
generally conceded, but the means by which this end shall be accomplished
and the sum of direct benefit which shall result to our citizens present a
controversy of the utmost importance. There should be no scheme accepted as
satisfactory by which the burdens of the people are only apparently
removed. Extravagant appropriations of public money, with all their
demoralizing consequences, should not be tolerated, either as a means of
relieving the Treasury of its present surplus or as furnishing pretext for
resisting a proper reduction in tariff rates. Existing evils and injustice
should be honestly recognized, boldly met, and effectively remedied. There
should be no cessation of the struggle until a plan is perfected, fair and
conservative toward existing industries, but which will reduce the cost to
consumers of the necessaries of life, while it provides for our
manufacturers the advantage of freer raw materials and permits no injury to
the interests of American labor.

The cause for which the battle is waged is comprised within lines clearly
and distinctly defined. It should never be compromised. It is the people's
cause.

It can not be denied that the selfish and private interests which are so
persistently heard when efforts are made to deal in a just and
comprehensive manner with our tariff laws are related to, if they are not
responsible for, the sentiment largely prevailing among the people that the
General Government is the fountain of individual and private aid; that it
may be expected to relieve with paternal care the distress of citizens and
communities, and that from the fullness of its Treasury it should, upon the
slightest possible pretext of promoting the general good, apply public
funds to the benefit of localities and individuals. Nor can it be denied
that there is a growing assumption that, as against the Government and in
favor of private claims and interests, the usual rules and limitations of
business principles and just dealing should be waived.

These ideas have been unhappily much encouraged by legislative
acquiescence. Relief from contracts made with the Government is too easily
accorded in favor of the citizen; the failure to support claims against the
Government by proof is often supplied by no better consideration than the
wealth of the Government and the poverty of the claimant; gratuities in the
form of pensions are granted upon no other real ground than the needy
condition of the applicant, or for reasons less valid; and large sums are
expended for public buildings and other improvements upon representations
scarcely claimed to be related to public needs and necessities.

The extent to which the consideration of such matters subordinate and
postpone action upon subjects of great public importance, but involving no
special private or partisan interest, should arrest attention and lead to
reformation.

A few of the numerous illustrations of this condition may be stated.

The crowded condition of the calendar of the Supreme Court, and the delay
to suitors and denial of justice resulting therefrom, has been strongly
urged upon the attention of the Congress, with a plan for the relief of the
situation approved by those well able to judge of its merits. While this
subject remains without effective consideration, many laws have been passed
providing for the holding of terms of inferior courts at places to suit the
convenience of localities, or to lay the foundation of an application for
the erection of a new public building.

Repeated recommendations have been submitted for the amendment and change
of the laws relating to our public lands so that their spoliation and
diversion to other uses than as homes for honest settlers might be
prevented. While a measure to meet this conceded necessity of reform
remains awaiting the action of the Congress, many claims to the public
lands and applications for their donation, in favor of States and
individuals, have been allowed.

A plan in aid of Indian management, recommended by those well informed as
containing valuable features in furtherance of the solution of the Indian
problem, has thus far failed of legislative sanction, while grants of
doubtful expediency to railroad corporations, permitting them to pass
through Indian reservations, have greatly multiplied.

The propriety and necessity of the erection of one or more prisons for the
confinement of United States convicts, and a post-office building in the
national capital, are not disputed. But these needs yet remain answered,
while scores of public buildings have been erected where their necessity
for public purposes is not apparent.

A revision of our pension laws could easily be made which would rest upon
just principles and provide for every worthy applicant. But while our
general pension laws remain confused and imperfect, hundreds of private
pension laws are annually passed, which are the sources of unjust
discrimination and popular demoralization.

Appropriation bills for the support of the Government are defaced by items
and provisions to meet private ends, and it is freely asserted by
responsible and experienced parties that a bill appropriating money for
public internal improvement would fail to meet with favor unless it
contained items more for local and private advantage than for public
benefit.

These statements can be much emphasized by an ascertainment of the
proportion of Federal legislation which either bears upon its face its
private character or which upon examination develops such a motive power.

And yet the people wait and expect from their chosen representatives such
patriotic action as will advance the welfare of the entire country; and
this expectation can only be answered by the performance of public duty
with unselfish purpose. Our mission among the nations of the earth and our
success in accomplishing the work God has given the American people to do
require of those intrusted with the making and execution of our laws
perfect devotion, above all other things, to the public good.

This devotion will lead us to strongly resist all impatience of
constitutional limitations of Federal power and to persistently check the
increasing tendency to extend the scope of Federal legislation into the
domain of State and local jurisdiction upon the plea of subserving the
public welfare. The preservation of the partitions between proper subjects
of Federal and local care and regulation is of such importance under the
Constitution, which is the law of our very existence, that no consideration
of expediency or sentiment should tempt us to enter upon doubtful ground.
We have undertaken to discover and proclaim the richest blessings of a free
government, with the Constitution as our guide. Let us follow the way it
points out; it will not mislead us. And surely no one who has taken upon
himself the solemn obligation to support and preserve the Constitution can
find justification or solace for disloyalty in the excuse that he wandered
and disobeyed in search of a better way to reach the public welfare than
the Constitution offers.

What has been said is deemed not inappropriate at a time when, from a
century's height, we view the way already trod by the American people and
attempt to discover their future path.

The seventh President of the United States--the soldier and statesman and
at all times the firm and brave friend of the people--in vindication of his
course as the protector of popular rights and the champion of true American
citizenship, declared: The ambition which leads me on is an anxious desire
and a fixed determination to restore to the people unimpaired the sacred
trust they have confided to my charge; to, heal the wounds of the
Constitution and to preserve it from further violation; to persuade my
countrymen, so far as I may, that it is not in a splendid government
supported by powerful monopolies and aristocratical establishments that
they will find happiness or their liberties protection, but in a plain
system, void of pomp, protecting all and granting favors to none,
dispensing its blessings like the dews of heaven, unseen and unfelt save in
the freshness and beauty they contribute to produce. It is such a
government that the genius of our people requires--such an one only under
which our States may remain for ages to come united, prosperous, and free.
In pursuance of a constitutional provision requiring the President from
time to time to give to the Congress information of the state of the Union,
I have the satisfaction to announce that the close of the year finds the
United States in the enjoyment of domestic tranquillity and at peace with
all the nations.

Since my last annual message our foreign relations have been strengthened
and improved by performance of international good offices and by new and
renewed treaties of amity, commerce, and reciprocal extradition of
criminals.

Those international questions which still await settlement are all
reasonably within the domain of amicable negotiation, and there is no
existing subject of dispute between the United States and any foreign power
that is not susceptible of satisfactory adjustment by frank diplomatic
treatment.

The questions between Great Britain and the United States relating to the
rights of American fishermen, under treaty and international comity, in the
territorial waters of Canada and Newfoundland, I regret to say, are not yet
satisfactorily adjusted.

These matters were fully treated in my message to the Senate of February 20
1888, together with which a convention, concluded under my authority with
Her Majesty's Government on the 15th of February last, for the removal of
all causes of misunderstanding, was submitted by me for the approval of the
Senate.

This treaty having been rejected by the Senate, I transmitted a message to
the Congress on the 23d of August last reviewing the transactions and
submitting for consideration certain recommendations for legislation
concerning the important questions involved.

Afterwards, on the 12th of September, in response to a resolution of the
Senate, I again communicated fully all the information in my possession as
to the action of the government of Canada affecting the commercial
relations between the Dominion and the United States, including the
treatment of American fishing vessels in the ports and waters of British
North America.

These communications have all been published, and therefore opened to the
knowledge of both Houses of Congress, although two were addressed to the
Senate alone.

Comment upon or repetition of their contents would be superfluous, and I am
not aware that anything has since occurred which should be added to the
facts therein stated. Therefore I merely repeat, as applicable to the
present time, the statement which will be found in my message to the Senate
of September 12 last, that--Since March 3, 1887, no case has been reported
to the Department of State wherein complaint was made of unfriendly or
unlawful treatment of American fishing vessels on the part of the Canadian
authorities in which reparation was not promptly and satisfactorily
obtained by the United States consul-general at Halifax. Having essayed in
the discharge of my duty to procure by negotiation the settlement of a
long-standing cause of dispute and to remove a constant menace to the good
relations of the two countries, and continuing to be of opinion that the
treaty of February last, which failed to receive the approval of the
Senate, did supply "a satisfactory, practical, and final adjustment, upon a
basis honorable and just to both parties, of the difficult and vexed
question to which it related," and having subsequently and unavailingly
recommended other legislation to Congress which I hoped would suffice to
meet the exigency created by the rejection of the treaty, I now again
invoke the earnest and immediate attention of the Congress to the condition
of this important question as it now stands before them and the country,
and for the settlement of which I am deeply solicitous.

Near the close of the month of October last occurrences of a deeply
regrettable nature were brought to my knowledge, which made it my painful
but imperative duty to obtain with as little delay as possible a new
personal channel of diplomatic intercourse in this country with the
Government of Great Britain.

The correspondence in relation to this incident will in due course be laid
before you, and will disclose the unpardonable conduct of the official
referred to in his interference by advice and counsel with the suffrages of
American citizens in the very crisis of the Presidential election then near
at hand, and also in his subsequent public declarations to justify his
action, superadding impugnment of the Executive and Senate of the United
States in connection with important questions now pending in controversy
between the two Governments.

The offense thus committed was most grave, involving disastrous
possibilities to the good relations of the United States and Great Britain,
constituting a gross breach of diplomatic privilege and an invasion of the
purely domestic affairs and essential sovereignty of the Government to
which the envoy was accredited.

Having first fulfilled the just demands of international comity by
affording full opportunity for Her Majesty's Government to act in relief of
the situation, I considered prolongation of discussion to be unwarranted,
and thereupon declined to further recognize the diplomatic character of the
person whose continuance in such function would destroy that mutual
confidence which is essential to the good understanding of the two
Governments and was inconsistent with the welfare and self-respect of the
Government of the United States.

The usual interchange of communication has since continued through Her
Majesty's legation in this city.

My endeavors to establish by international cooperation measures for the
prevention of the extermination of fur seals in Bering Sea have not been
relaxed, and I have hopes of being enabled shortly to submit an effective
and satisfactory conventional projet with the maritime powers for the
approval of the Senate.

The coastal boundary between our Alaskan possessions and British Columbia,
I regret to say, has not received the attention demanded by its importance,
and which on several occasions heretofore I have had the honor to recommend
to the Congress.

The admitted impracticability, if not impossibility, of making an accurate
and precise survey and demarcation of the boundary line as it is recited in
the treaty with Russia under which Alaska was ceded to the United States
renders it absolutely requisite for the prevention of international
jurisdictional complications that adequate appropriation for a
reconnoissance and survey to obtain proper knowledge of the locality and
the geographical features of the boundary should be authorized by Congress
with as little delay as possible.

Knowledge to be only thus obtained is an essential prerequisite for
negotiation for ascertaining a common boundary, or as preliminary to any
other mode of settlement.

It is much to be desired that some agreement should be reached with Her
Majesty's Government by which the damages to life and property on the Great
Lakes may be alleviated by removing or humanely regulating the obstacles to
reciprocal assistance to wrecked or stranded vessels.

The act of June 19, 1878, which offers to Canadian vessels free access to
our inland waters in aid of wrecked or disabled vessels, has not yet become
effective through concurrent action by Canada.

The due protection of our citizens of French origin or descent from claim
of military service in the event of their returning to or visiting France
has called forth correspondence which was laid before you at the last
session.

In the absence of conventional agreement as to naturalization, which is
greatly to be desired, this Government sees no occasion to recede from the
sound position it has maintained not only with regard to France, but as to
all countries with which the United States have not concluded special
treaties.

Twice within the last year has the imperial household of Germany been
visited by death; and I have hastened to express the sorrow of this people,
and their appreciation of the lofty character of the late aged Emperor
William, and their sympathy with the heroism under suffering of his son the
late Emperor Frederick.

I renew my recommendation of two years ago for the passage of a bill for
the refunding to certain German steamship lines of the interest upon
tonnage dues illegally exacted.

On the 12th [2d] of April last I laid before the House of Representatives
full information respecting our interests in Samoa; and in the subsequent
correspondence on the same subject, which will be laid before you in due
course, the history of events in those islands will be found.

In a message accompanying my approval, on the 1st day of October last, of a
bill for the exclusion of Chinese laborers, I laid before Congress full
information and all correspondence touching the negotiation of the treaty
with China concluded at this capital on the 12th day of March, 1888, and
which, having been confirmed by the Senate with certain amendments, was
rejected by the Chinese Government. This message contained a recommendation
that a sum of money be appropriated as compensation to Chinese subjects who
had suffered injuries at the hands of lawless men within our jurisdiction.
Such appropriation having been duly made, the fund awaits reception by the
Chinese Government.

It is sincerely hoped that by the cessation of the influx of this class of
Chinese subjects, in accordance with the expressed wish of both
Governments, a cause of unkind feeling has been permanently removed.

On the 9th of August, 1887, notification was given by the Japanese minister
at this capital of the adjournment of the conference for the revision of
the treaties of Japan with foreign powers, owing to the objection of his
Government to the provision in the draft jurisdictional convention which
required the submission of the criminal code of the Empire to the powers in
advance of its becoming operative. This notification was, however,
accompanied with an assurance of Japan's intention to continue the work of
revision.

Notwithstanding this temporary interruption of negotiations, it is hoped
that improvements may soon be secured in the jurisdictional system as
respects foreigners in Japan, and relief afforded to that country from the
present undue and oppressive foreign control in matters of commerce.

I earnestly recommend that relief be provided for the injuries accidentally
caused to Japanese subjects in the island Ikisima by the target practice of
one of our vessels.

A diplomatic mission from Korea has been received, and the formal
intercourse between the two countries contemplated by the treaty of 1882 is
now established.

Legislative provision is hereby recommended to organize and equip consular
courts in Korea.

Persia has established diplomatic representation at this capital, and has
evinced very great interest in the enterprise and achievements of our
citizens. I am therefore hopeful that beneficial commercial relations
between the two countries may be brought about.

I announce with sincere regret that Hayti has again become the theater of
insurrection, disorder, and bloodshed. The titular government of president
Saloman has been forcibly overthrown and he driven out of the country to
France, where he has since died.

The tenure of power has been so unstable amid the war of factions that has
ensued since the expulsion of President Saloman that no government
constituted by the will of the Haytian people has been recognized as
administering responsibly the affairs of that country. Our representative
has been instructed to abstain from interference between the warring
factions, and a vessel of our Navy has been sent to Haytian waters to
sustain our minister and for the protection of the persons and property of
American citizens.

Due precautions have been taken to enforce our neutrality laws and prevent
our territory from becoming the base of military supplies for either of the
warring factions.

Under color of a blockade, of which no reasonable notice had been given,
and which does not appear to have been efficiently maintained, a seizure of
vessels under the American flag has been reported, and in consequence
measures to prevent and redress any molestation of our innocent merchantmen
have been adopted.

Proclamation was duly made on the 9th day of November, 1887, of the
conventional extensions of the treaty of June 3, 1875, with Hawaii, under
which relations of such special and beneficent intercourse have been
created.

In the vast field of Oriental commerce now unfolded from our Pacific
borders no feature presents stronger recommendations for Congressional
action than the establishment of communication by submarine telegraph with
Honolulu.

The geographical position of the Hawaiian group in relation to our Pacific
States creates a natural interdependency and mutuality of interest which
our present treaties were intended to foster, and which make close
communication a logical and commercial necessity.

The wisdom of concluding a treaty of commercial reciprocity with Mexico has
been heretofore stated in my messages to Congress, and the lapse of time
and growth of commerce with that close neighbor and sister Republic confirm
the judgment so expressed.

The precise relocation of our boundary line is needful, and adequate
appropriation is now recommended.

It is with sincere satisfaction that I am enabled to advert to the spirit
of good neighborhood and friendly cooperation and conciliation that has
marked the correspondence and action of the Mexican authorities in their
share of the task of maintaining law and order about the line of our common
boundary.

The long-pending boundary dispute between Costa Rica and Nicaragua was
referred to my arbitration, and by an award made on the 22d of March last
the question has been finally settled to the expressed satisfaction of both
of the parties in interest.

The Empire of Brazil, in abolishing the last vestige of slavery among
Christian nations, called forth the earnest congratulations of this
Government in expression of the cordial sympathies of our people.

The claims of nearly all other countries against Chile growing out of her
late war with Bolivia and Peru have been disposed of, either by arbitration
or by a lump settlement. Similar claims of our citizens will continue to be
urged upon the Chilean Government, and it is hoped will not be subject to
further delays.

A comprehensive treaty of amity and commerce with Peru was proclaimed on
November 7 last, and it is expected that under its operation mutual
prosperity and good understanding will be promoted.

In pursuance of the policy of arbitration, a treaty to settle the claim of
Santos, an American citizen, against Ecuador has been concluded under my
authority, and will be duly submitted for the approval of the Senate.

Like disposition of the claim of Carlos Butterfield against Denmark and of
Van Bokkelen against Hayti will probably be made, and I trust the principle
of such settlements may be extended in practice under the approval of the
Senate.

Through unforeseen causes, foreign to the will of both Governments, the
ratification of the convention of December 5, 1885, with Venezuela, for the
rehearing of claims of citizens of the United States under the treaty of
1866, failed of exchange within the term provided, and a supplementary
convention, further extending the time for exchange of ratifications and
explanatory of an ambiguous provision of the prior convention, now awaits
the advice and consent of the Senate.

Although this matter, in the stage referred to, concerns only the
concurrent treaty-making power of one branch of Congress, I advert to it in
view of the interest repeatedly and conspicuously shown by you in your
legislative capacity in favor of a speedy and equitable adjustment of the
questions growing out of the discredited judgments of the previous mixed
commission of Caracas. With every desire to do justice to the
representations of Venezuela in this regard, the time seems to have come to
end this matter, and I trust the prompt confirmation by both parties of the
supplementary action referred to will avert the need of legislative or
other action to prevent the longer withholding of such rights of actual
claimants as may be shown to exist.

As authorized by the Congress, preliminary steps have been taken for the
assemblage at this capital during the coming year of the representatives of
South and Central American States, together with those of Mexico, Hayti,
and San Domingo, to discuss sundry important monetary and commercial
topics.

Excepting in those cases where, from reasons of contiguity of territory and
the existence of a common border line incapable of being guarded,
reciprocal commercial treaties may be found expedient, it is believed that
commercial policies inducing freer mutual exchange of products can be most
advantageously arranged by independent but cooperative legislation.

In the mode last mentioned the control of our taxation for revenue will be
always retained in our own hands unrestricted by conventional agreements
with other governments.

In conformity also with Congressional authority, the maritime powers have
been invited to confer in Washington in April next upon the practicability
of devising uniform rules and measures for the greater security of life and
property at sea. A disposition to accept on the part of a number of the
powers has already been manifested, and if the cooperation of the nations
chiefly interested shall be secured important results may be confidently
anticipated.

The act of June 26, 1884, and the acts amendatory thereof, in relation to
tonnage duties, have given rise to extended correspondence with foreign
nations with whom we have existing treaties of navigation and commerce, and
have caused wide and regrettable divergence of opinion in relation to the
imposition of the duties referred to. These questions are important, and I
shall make them the subject of a special and more detailed communication at
the present session.

With the rapid increase of immigration to our shores and the facilities of
modern travel, abuses of the generous privileges afforded by our
naturalization laws call for their careful revision.

The easy and unguarded manner in which certificates of American citizenship
can now be obtained has induced a class, unfortunately large, to avail
themselves of the opportunity to become absolved from allegiance to their
native land, and yet by a foreign residence to escape any just duty and
contribution of service to the country of their proposed adoption. Thus,
while evading the duties of citizenship to the United States, they may make
prompt claim for its national protection and demand its intervention in
their behalf. International complications of a serious nature arise, and
the correspondence of the State Department discloses the great number and
complexity of the questions which have been raised.

Our laws regulating the issue of passports should be carefully revised, and
the institution of a central bureau of registration at the capital is again
strongly recommended. By this means full particulars of each case of
naturalization in the United States would be secured and properly indexed
and recorded, and thus many cases of spurious citizenship would be detected
and unjust responsibilities would be avoided.

The reorganization of the consular service is a matter of serious
importance to our national interests. The number of existing principal
consular offices is believed to be greater than is at all necessary for the
conduct of the public business. It need not be our policy to maintain more
than a moderate number of principal offices, each supported by a salary
sufficient to enable the incumbent to live in comfort, and so distributed
as to secure the convenient supervision, through subordinate agencies, of
affairs over a considerable district.

I repeat the recommendations heretofore made by me that the appropriations
for the maintenance of our diplomatic and consular service should be
recast; that the so-called notarial or unofficial fees, which our
representatives abroad are now permitted to treat as personal perquisites,
should be forbidden; that a system of consular inspection should be
instituted, and that a limited number of secretaries of legation at large
should be authorized.

Preparations for the centennial celebration, on April 30, 1889, of the
inauguration of George Washington as President of the United States, at the
city of New York, have been made by a voluntary organization of the
citizens of that locality, and believing that an opportunity should be
afforded for the expression of the interest felt throughout the country in
this event, I respectfully recommend fitting and cooperative action by
Congress on behalf of the people of the United States.

The report of the Secretary of the Treasury exhibits in detail the
condition of our national finances and the operations of the several
branches of the Government related to his Department.

The total ordinary revenues of the Government for the fiscal year ended
June 30, 1888, amounted to $379,266,074.76, of which $219,091,173.63 was
received from customs duties and $124,296,871.98 from internal revenue
taxes.

The total receipts from all sources exceeded those for the fiscal year
ended June 30, 1887, by $7,862,797.10.

The ordinary expenditures of the Government for the fiscal year ending June
30, 1888, were $259,653,958.67, leaving a surplus of $119,612,116.09.

The decrease in these expenditures as compared with the fiscal year ended
June 30, 1887, was $8,278,221.30, notwithstanding the payment of more than
$5,000,000 for pensions in excess of what was paid for that purpose in the
latter-mentioned year.

The revenues of the Government for the year ending June 30, 1889,
ascertained for the quarter ended September 30, 1888, and estimated for the
remainder of the time, amount to $377,000,000, and the actual and estimated
ordinary expenditures for the same year are $273,000,000, leaving an
estimated surplus of $104,000,000.

The estimated receipts for the year ending June 30, 1890, are $377,000,000,
and the estimated ordinary expenditures for the same time are
$275,767,488.34, showing a surplus of $101,232,511.66.

The foregoing statements of surplus do not take into account the sum
necessary to be expended to meet the requirements of the sinking-fund act,
amounting to more than $47,000,000 annually.

The cost of collecting the customs revenues for the last fiscal year was
2.44 per cent; for the year 1885 it was 3.77 per cent.

The excess of internal-revenue taxes collected during the last fiscal year
over those collected for the year ended June 30, 1887, was $5,489,174.26,
and the cost of collecting this revenue decreased from 3.4 per cent in 1887
to less than 3.2 per cent for the last year. The tax collected on
oleomargarine was $723,948.04 for the year ending June 30, 1887, and
$864,139.88 for the following year.

The requirements of the sinking-fund act have been met for the year ended
June 30, 1888, and for the current year also, by the purchase of bonds.
After complying with this law as positively required, and bonds sufficient
for that purpose had been bought at a premium, it was not deemed prudent to
further expend the surplus in such purchases until the authority to do so
should be more explicit. A resolution, however, having been passed by both
Houses of Congress removing all doubt as to Executive authority, daily
purchases of bonds were commenced on the 23d day of April, 1888, and have
continued until the present time. By this plan bonds of the Government not
yet due have been purchased up to and including the 30th day of November,
1888, amounting to $94,700,400, the premium paid thereon amounting to
$17,508,613.08.

The premium added to the principal of these bonds represents an investment
yielding about 2 per cent interest for the time they still had to run, and
the saving to the Government represented by the difference between the
amount of interest at 2 per cent upon the sum paid for principal and
premium and what it would have paid for interest at the rate specified in
the bonds if they had run to their maturity is about $27,165,000.

At first sight this would seem to be a profitable and sensible transaction
on the part of the Government, but, as suggested by the Secretary of the
Treasury, the surplus thus expended for the purchase of bonds was money
drawn from the people in excess of any actual need of the Government and
was so expended rather than allow it to remain idle in the Treasury. If
this surplus, under the operation of just and equitable laws, had been left
in the hands of the people, it would have been worth in their business at
least 6 per cent per annum. Deducting from the amount of interest upon the
principal and premium of these bonds for the time they had to run at the
rate of 6 per cent the saving of 2 per cent made for the people by the
purchase of such bonds, the loss will appear to be $55,760,000.

This calculation would seem to demonstrate that if excessive and
unnecessary taxation is continued and the Government is forced to pursue
this policy of purchasing its own bonds at the premiums which it will be
necessary to pay, the loss to the people will be hundreds of millions of
dollars.

Since the purchase of bonds was undertaken as mentioned nearly all that
have been offered were at last accepted. It has been made quite apparent
that the Government was in danger of being subjected to combinations to
raise their price, as appears by the instance cited by the Secretary of the
offering of bonds of the par value of only $326,000 so often that the
aggregate of the sums demanded for their purchase amounted to more than $
19,700,000.

Notwithstanding the large sums paid out in the purchase of bonds, the
surplus in the Treasury on the 30th day of November, 1888, was
$52,234,610.01, after deducting about $20,000,000 just drawn out for the
payment of pensions.

At the close of the fiscal year ended June 30, 1887, there had been coined
under the compulsory silver-coinage act $266,988,280 in silver dollars,
$55,504,310 of which were in the hands of the people.

On the 30th day of June, 1888, there had been coined $299,708,790; and of
this $55,829,303 was in circulation in coin, and $200,387,376 in silver
certificates, for the redemption of which silver dollars to that amount
were held by the Government.

On the 30th day of November, 1888, $312,570,990 had been coined,
$60,970,990 of the silver dollars were actually in circulation, and
$237,418,346 in certificates.

The Secretary recommends the suspension of the further coinage of silver,
and in such recommendation I earnestly concur.

For further valuable information and timely recommendations I ask the
careful attention of the Congress to the Secretary's report.

The Secretary of War reports that the Army at the date of the last
consolidated returns consisted of 2,189 officers and 24,549 enlisted men.

The actual expenditures of the War Department for the fiscal year ended
June 30, 1888, amounted to $41,165,107.07, of which sum $9,158,516.63 was
expended for public works, including river and harbor improvements.

"The Board of Ordnance and Fortifications" provided for under the act
approved September 22 last was convened October 30, 1888, and plans and
specifications for procuring forgings for 8, 10, and 12 inch guns, under
provisions of section 4, and also for procuring 12-inch breech-loading
mortars, cast iron, hooped with steel, under the provisions of section 5 of
the said act, were submitted to the Secretary of War for reference to the
board, by the Ordnance Department, on the same date.

These plans and specifications having been promptly approved by the board
and the Secretary of War, the necessary authority to publish advertisements
inviting proposals in the newspapers throughout the country was granted by
the Secretary on November 12, and on November 13 the advertisements were
sent out to the different newspapers designated. The bids for the steel
forgings are to be opened on December 20, 1888, and for the mortars on
December 15, 1888.

A board of ordnance officers was convened at the Watervliet Arsenal on
October 4, 1888, to prepare the necessary plans and specifications for the
establishment of an army gun factory at that point. The preliminary report
of this board, with estimates for shop buildings and officers' quarters,
was approved by the Board of Ordnance and Fortifications November 6 and 8.
The specifications and form of advertisement and instructions to bidders
have been prepared, and advertisements inviting proposals for the
excavations for the shop building and for erecting the two sets of
officers' quarters have been published. The detailed drawings and
specifications for the gun-factory building are well in hand, and will be
finished within three or four months, when bids will be invited for the
erection of the building. The list of machines, etc., is made out, and it
is expected that the plans for the large lathes, etc., will be completed
within about four months, and after approval by the Board of Ordnance and
Fortifications bids for furnishing the same will be invited. The machines
and other fixtures will be completed as soon as the shop is in readiness to
receive them, probably about July, 1890.

Under the provisions of the Army bill for the procurement of pneumatic
dynamite guns, the necessary specifications are now being prepared, and
advertisements for proposals will issue early in December. The guns will
probably be of 15 inches caliber and fire a projectile that will carry a
charge each of about 500 pounds of explosive gelatine with full-caliber
projectiles. The guns will probably be delivered in from six to ten months
from the date of the contract, so that all the guns of this class that can
be procured under the provisions of the law will be purchased during the
year 1889.

I earnestly request that the recommendations contained in the Secretary's
report, all of which are, in my opinion, calculated to increase the
usefulness and discipline of the Army, may receive the consideration of the
Congress. Among these the proposal that there should be provided a plan for
the examination of officers to test their fitness for promotion is of the
utmost importance. This reform has been before recommended in the reports
of the Secretary, and its expediency is so fully demonstrated by the
argument he presents in its favor that its adoption should no longer be
neglected.

The death of General Sheridan in August last was a national affliction. The
Army then lost the grandest of its chiefs. The country lost a brave and
experienced soldier, a wise and discreet counselor, and a modest and
sensible man. Those who in any manner came within the range of his personal
association will never fail to pay deserved and willing homage to his
greatness and the glory of his career, but they will cherish with more
tender sensibility the loving memory of his simple, generous, and
considerate nature.

The Apache Indians, whose removal from their reservation in Arizona
followed the capture of those of their number who engaged in a bloody
and murderous raid during a part of the years 1885 and 1886, are now held
as prisoners of war at Mount Vernon Barracks, in the State of Alabama. They
numbered on the 31st day of October, the date of the last report, 83 men,
170 women, 70 boys, and 59 girls; in all, 382 persons. The commanding
officer states that they are in good health and contented, and that they
are kept employed as fully as is possible in the circumstances. The
children, as they arrive at a suitable age, are sent to the Indian schools
at Carlisle and Hampton.

Last summer some charitable and kind people asked permission to send two
teachers to these Indians for the purpose of instructing the adults as well
as such children as should be found there. Such permission was readily
granted, accommodations were provided for the teachers, and some portions
of the buildings at the barracks were made available for school purposes.
The good work contemplated has been commenced, and the teachers engaged are
paid by the ladies with whom the plan originated.

I am not at all in sympathy with those benevolent but injudicious people
who are constantly insisting that these Indians should be returned to their
reservation. Their removal was an absolute necessity if the lives and
property of citizens upon the frontier are to be at all regarded by the
Government. Their continued restraint at a distance from the scene of their
repeated and cruel murders and outrages is still necessary. It is a
mistaken philanthropy, every way injurious, which prompts the desire to see
these savages returned to their old haunts. They are in their present
location as the result of the best judgment of those having official
responsibility in the matter, and who are by no means lacking in kind
consideration for the Indians. A number of these prisoners have forfeited
their lives to outraged law and humanity. Experience has proved that they
are dangerous and can not be trusted. This is true not only of those who on
the warpath have heretofore actually been guilty of atrocious murder, but
of their kindred and friends, who, while they remained upon their
reservation, furnished aid and comfort to those absent with bloody intent.

These prisoners should be treated kindly and kept in restraint far from the
locality of their former reservation; they should be subjected to efforts
calculated to lead to their improvement and the softening of their savage
and cruel instincts, but their return to their old home should be
persistently resisted.

The Secretary in his report gives a graphic history of these Indians, and
recites with painful vividness their bloody deeds and the unhappy failure
of the Government to manage them by peaceful means. It will be amazing if a
perusal of this history will allow the survival of a desire for the return
of these prisoners to their reservation upon sentimental or any other
grounds.

The report of the Secretary of the Navy demonstrates very intelligent
management in that important Department, and discloses the most
satisfactory progress in the work of reconstructing the Navy made during
the past year. Of the ships in course of construction five, viz, the
Charleston, Baltimore, Yorktown, Vesuvius, and the Petrel, have in that
time been launched and are rapidly approaching completion; and in addition
to the above, the Philadelphia, the San Francisco, the Newark, the
Bennington, the Concord, and the Herreshoff torpedo boat are all under
contract for delivery to the Department during the next year. The progress
already made and being made gives good ground for the expectation that
these eleven vessels will be incorporated as part of the American Navy
within the next twelve months.

The report shows that notwithstanding the large expenditures for new
construction and the additional labor they involve the total ordinary or
current expenditures of the Department for the three years ending June 30,
1888, are less by more than 20 per cent than such expenditures for the
three years ending June 30, 1884.

The various steps which have been taken to improve the business methods of
the Department are reviewed by the Secretary. The purchasing of supplies
has been consolidated and placed under a responsible bureau head. This has
resulted in the curtailment of open purchases, which in the years 1884 and
1885 amounted to over 50 per cent of all the purchases of the Department,
to less than 11 per cent; so that at the present time about 90 per cent of
the total departmental purchases are made by contract and after
competition. As the expenditures on this account exceed an average of
$2,000,000 annually, it is evident that an important improvement in the
system has been inaugurated and substantial economies introduced.

The report of the Postmaster-General shows a marked increase of business in
every branch of the postal service.

The number of post-offices on July 1, 1888, was 57,376, an increase of
6,124 in three years and of 2,219 for the last fiscal year. The
latter-mentioned increase is classified as follows:

New England States -

Middle States - 181

Southern States and Indian Territory (41) - 1,406

The States and Territories of the Pacific Coast - 190

The ten States and Territories of the West and Northwest - 435

District of Columbia - 2 -

1893:
To the Congress of the United States:

The constitutional duty which requires the President from time to time to give
to the Congress information of the state of the Union and recommend to their
consideration such measures as he shall judge necessary and expedient is
fittingly entered upon by commending to the Congress a careful examination of
the detailed statements and well-supported recommendations contained in the
reports of the heads of Departments, who are chiefly charged with the
executive work of the Government. In an effort to abridge this communication
as much as is consistent with its purpose I shall supplement a brief reference
to the contents of these departmental reports by the mention of such executive
business and incidents as are not embraced therein and by such recommendations
as appear to be at this particular time appropriate.

While our foreign relations have not at all times during the past year been
entirely free from perplexity, no embarrassing situation remains that will not
yield to the spirit of fairness and love of justice which, joined with
consistent firmness, characterize a truly American foreign policy.

My predecessor having accepted the office of arbitrator of the long-standing
Missions boundary dispute, tendered to the President by the Argentine Republic
and Brazil, it has been my agreeable duty to receive the special envoys
commissioned by those States to lay before me evidence and arguments in behalf
of their respective Governments.

The outbreak of domestic hostilities in the Republic of Brazil found the
United States alert to watch the interests of our citizens in that country,
with which we carry on important commerce. Several vessels of our new Navy are
now and for some time have been stationed at Rio de Janeiro. The struggle
being between the established Government, which controls the machinery of
administration, and with which we maintain friendly relations, and certain
officers of the navy employing the vessels of their command in an attack upon
the national capital and chief seaport, and lacking as it does the elements of
divided administration, I have failed to see that the insurgents can
reasonably claim recognition as belligerents.

Thus far the position of our Government has been that of an attentive but
impartial observer of the unfortunate conflict. Emphasizing our fixed policy
of impartial neutrality in such a condition of affairs as now exists, I deemed
it necessary to disavow in a manner not to be misunderstood the unauthorized
action of our late naval commander in those waters in saluting the revolted
Brazilian admiral, being indisposed to countenance an act calculated to give
gratuitous sanction to the local insurrection.

The convention between our Government and Chile having for its object the
settlement and adjustment of the demand of the two countries against each
other has been made effective by he organization of the claims commission
provided for. The two Governments failing to agree upon the third member of
the commission, the good offices of the President of the Swiss Republic were
invoked, as provided in the treaty, and the selection of the Swiss
representative in this country to complete the organization was gratifying
alike to the United States and Chile.

The vexatious question of so-called legation asylum for offenders against the
state and its laws was presented anew in Chile by the unauthorized action of
the late United States minister in receiving into his official residence two
persons who had just failed in an attempt at revolution and against whom
criminal charges were pending growing out of a former abortive disturbance.
The doctrine of asylum as applied to this case is not sanctioned by the best
precedents, and when allowed tends to encourage sedition and strife. Under no
circumstances can the representatives of this Government be permitted, under
the ill-defined fiction of extraterritoriality, to interrupt the
administration of criminal justice in the countries to which they are
accredited. A temperate demand having been made by the Chilean Government for
the correction of this conduct in the instance mentioned, the minister was
instructed no longer to harbor the offenders.

The legislation of last year known as the Geary law, requiring the
registration of all Chinese laborers entitled to residence in the United
States and the deportation of all not complying with the provisions of the act
within the time prescribed, met with much opposition from Chinamen in this
country. Acting upon the advice of eminent counsel that the law was
unconstitutional, the great mass of Chinese laborers, pending judicial inquiry
as to its validity, in good faith declined to apply for the certificates
required by its provisions. A test case upon proceeding by habeas corpus was
brought before the Supreme Court, and on May 15, 1893, a decision was made by
that tribunal sustaining the law.

It is believed that under the recent amendment of the act extending the time
for registration the Chinese laborers thereto entitled who desire to reside in
this country will now avail themselves of the renewed privilege thus afforded
of establishing by lawful procedure their right to remain, and that thereby
the necessity of enforced deportation may to a great degree be avoided.

It has devolved upon the United States minister at Peking, as dean of the
diplomatic body, and in the absence of a representative of Sweden and Norway,
to press upon the Chinese Government reparation for the recent murder of
Swedish missionaries at Sung-pu. This question is of vital interest to all
countries whose citizens engage in missionary work in the interior.

By Article XII of the general act of Brussels, signed July 2, 1890, for the
suppression of the slave trade and the restriction of certain injurious
commerce in the Independent State of the Kongo and in the adjacent zone of
central Africa, the United States and the other signatory powers agreed to
adopt appropriate means for the punishment of persons selling arms and
ammunition to the natives and for the confiscation of the inhibited articles.
It being the plain duty of this Government to aid in suppressing the nefarious
traffic, impairing as it does the praiseworthy and civilizing efforts now in
progress in that region, I recommend that an act be passed prohibiting the
sale of arms and intoxicants to natives in the regulated zone by our citizens.

Costa Rica has lately testified its friendliness by surrendering to the United
States, in the absence of a convention of extradition, but upon duly submitted
evidence of criminality, a noted fugitive from justice. It is trusted that the
negotiation of a treaty with that country to meet recurring cases of this kind
will soon be accomplished. In my opinion treaties for reciprocal extradition
should be concluded with all those countries with which the United States has
not already conventional arrangements of that character.

I have deemed it fitting to express to the Governments of Costa Rica and
Colombia the kindly desire of the United States to see their pending boundary
dispute finally closed by arbitration in conformity with the spirit of the
treaty concluded between them some years ago.

Our relations with the French Republic continue to be intimate and cordial. I
sincerely hope that the extradition treaty with that country, as amended by
the Senate, will soon be operative.

While occasional questions affecting our naturalized citizens returning to the
land of their birth have arisen in our intercourse with Germany, our relations
with that country continue satisfactory.

The questions affecting our relations with Great Britain have been treated in
a spirit of friendliness.

Negotiations are in progress between the two Governments with a view to such
concurrent action as will make the award and regulations agreed upon by the
Bering Sea Tribunal of Arbitration practically effective, and it is not
doubted that Great Britain will cooperate freely with this country for the
accomplishment of that purpose.

The dispute growing out of the discriminating tolls imposed in the Welland
Canal upon cargoes of cereals bound to and from the lake ports of the United
States was adjusted by the substitution of a more equitable schedule of
charges, and my predecessor thereupon suspended his proclamation imposing
discriminating tolls upon British transit through our canals.

A request for additions to the list of extraditable offenses covered by the
existing treaty between the two countries is under consideration.

During the past year an American citizen employed in a subordinate commercial
position in Hayti, after suffering a protracted imprisonment on an unfounded
charge of smuggling, was finally liberated on judicial examination. Upon
urgent representation to the Haytian Government a suitable indemnity was paid
to the sufferer.

By a law of Hayti a sailing vessel, having discharged her cargo, is refused
clearance until the duties on such cargo have been paid. The hardship of this
measure upon American shipowners, who conduct the bulk of the carrying trade
of that country, has been insisted on with a view of securing the removal of
this cause of complaint.

Upon receiving authentic information of the firing upon an American mail
steamer touching at the port of Amapala because her captain refused to deliver
up a passenger in transit from Nicaragua to Guatemala upon demand of the
military authorities of Honduras, our minister to that country, under
instructions, protested against the wanton act and demanded satisfaction. The
Government of Honduras, actuated by a sense of justice and in a spirit of the
utmost friendship, promptly disavowed the illegal conduct of its officers and
expressed sincere regret for the occurrence.

It is confidently anticipated that a satisfactory adjustment will soon be
reached of the questions arising out of the seizure and use of American
vessels by insurgents in Honduras and the subsequent denial by the successful
Government of commercial privileges to those vessels on that account.

A notable part of the southeasterly coast of Liberia between the Cavally and
San Pedro rivers, which for nearly half a century has been generally
recognized as belonging to that Republic by cession and purchase, has been
claimed to be under the protectorate of France in virtue of agreements entered
into by the native tribes, over whom Liberia's control has not been well
maintained.

More recently negotiations between the Liberian representative and the French
Government resulted in the signature at Paris of a treaty whereby as an
adjustment certain Liberian territory is ceded to France. This convention at
last advices had not been ratified by the Liberian Legislature and Executive.

Feeling a sympathetic interest in the fortunes of the little Commonwealth, the
establishment and development of which were largely aided by the benevolence
of our countrymen, and which constitutes the only independently sovereign
state on the west coast of Africa, this Government has suggested to the French
Government its earnest concern lest territorial impairment in Liberia should
take place without her unconstrained consent.

Our relations with Mexico continue to be of that close and friendly nature
which should always characterize the intercourse of two neighboring republics.

The work of relocating the monuments marking the boundary between the two
countries from Paso del Norte to the Pacific is now nearly completed.

The commission recently organized under the conventions of 1884 and 1889 it is
expected will speedily settle disputes growing out of the shifting currents of
the Rio Grande River east of E1 Paso.

Nicaragua has recently passed through two revolutions, the party at first
successful having in turn been displaced by another. Our newly appointed
minister by his timely good offices aided in a peaceful adjustment of the
controversy involved in the first conflict. The large American interests
established in that country in connection with the Nicaragua Canal were not
molested.

The canal company has unfortunately become financially seriously embarrassed,
but a generous treatment had been extended to it by the Government of
Nicaragua. The United States are especially interested in the successful
achievement of the vast undertaking this company has in charge. That it should
be accomplished under distinctively American auspices, and its enjoyment
assured not only to the vessels of this country as a channel of communication
between our Atlantic and Pacific sea-boards, but to the ships of the world in
the interests of civilization, is a proposition which, in my judgment, does
not admit of question.

Guatemala has also been visited by the political vicissitudes which have
afflicted her Central American neighbors, but the dissolution of its
Legislature and the proclamation of a dictatorship have been unattended with
civil war.

An extradition treaty with Norway has recently been exchanged and proclaimed.

The extradition treaty with Russia signed in March, 1887, and amended and
confirmed by the Senate in February last, was duly proclaimed last June.

Led by a desire to compose differences and contribute to the restoration of
order in Samoa, which for some years previous had been the scene of
conflicting foreign pretensions and native strife, the United States,
departing from its policy consecrated by a century of observance, entered four
years ago into the treaty of Berlin, thereby becoming jointly bound with
England and Germany to establish and maintain Malietoa Laupepa as King of
Samoa. The treaty provided for a foreign court of justice; a municipal council
for the district of Apia, with a foreign president thereof, authorized to
advise the King; a tribunal for the settlement of native and foreign land
titles, and a revenue system for the Kingdom. It entailed upon the three
powers that part of the cost of the new Government not met by the revenue of
the islands.

Early in the life of this triple protectorate the native dissensions it was
designed to quell revived. Rivals defied the authority of the new King,
refusing to pay taxes and demanding the election of a ruler by native
suffrage. Mataafa, an aspirant to the throne, and a large number of his native
adherents were in open rebellion on one of the islands. Quite lately, at the
request of the other powers and in fulfillment of its treaty obligation, this
Government agreed to unite in a joint military movement of such dimensions as
would probably secure the surrender of the insurgents without bloodshed.

The war ship Philadelphia was accordingly put under orders for Samoa, but
before she arrived the threatened conflict was precipitated by King Malietoa's
attack upon the insurgent camp. Mataafa was defeated and a number of his men
killed. The British and German naval vessels present subsequently secured the
surrender of Mataafa and his adherents. The defeated chief and ten of his
principal supporters were deported to a German island of the Marshall group,
where they are held as prisoners under the joint responsibility and cost of
the three powers.

This incident and the events leading up to it signally illustrate the impolicy
of entangling alliances with foreign powers.

More than fifteen years ago this Government preferred a claim against Spain in
behalf of one of our citizens for property seized and confiscated in Cuba. In
1886 the claim was adjusted, Spain agreeing to pay unconditionally, as a fair
indemnity, $1,500,000. A respectful but earnest note was recently addressed to
the Spanish Government insisting upon prompt fulfillment of its long-neglected
obligation.

Other claims preferred by the United States against Spain in behalf of
American citizens for property confiscated in Cuba have been pending for many
years.

At the time Spain's title to the Caroline Islands was confirmed by arbitration
that Government agreed that the rights which had been acquired there by
American missionaries should be recognized and respected. It is sincerely
hoped that this pledge will be observed by allowing our missionaries, who were
removed from Ponape to a place of safety by a United States war ship during
the late troubles between the Spanish garrison and the natives, to return to
their field of usefulness.

The reproduced caravel Santa Maria, built by Spain and sent to the Columbian
Exposition, has been presented to the United States in token of amity and in
commemoration of the event it was designed to celebrate. I recommend that in
accepting this gift Congress make grateful recognition of the sincere
friendship which prompted it.

Important matters have demanded attention in our relations with the Ottoman
Porte.

The firing and partial destruction by an unrestrained mob of one of the school
buildings of Anatolia College, established by citizens of the United States at
Marsovan, and the apparent indifference of the Turkish Government to the
outrage, notwithstanding the complicity of some of its officials, called for
earnest remonstrance, which was followed by promise of reparation and
punishment of the offenders.

Indemnity for the injury to the buildings has already been paid, permission to
rebuild given, registration of the school property in the name of the American
owners secured, and efficient protection guaranteed.

Information received of maltreatment suffered by an inoffensive American woman
engaged in missionary work in Turkish Koordistan was followed by such
representations to the Porte as resulted in the issuance of orders for the
punishment of her assailants, the removal of a delinquent official, and the
adoption of measures for the protection of our citizens engaged in mission and
other lawful work in that quarter.

Turkey complains that her Armenian subjects obtain citizenship in this country
not to identify themselves in good faith with our people, but with the
intention of returning to the land of their birth and there engaging in
sedition. This complaint is not wholly without foundation. A journal published
in this country in the Armenian language openly counsels its readers to arm,
organize, and participate in movements for the subversion of Turkish authority
in the Asiatic provinces. The Ottoman Government has announced its intention
to expel from its dominions Armenians who have obtained naturalization in the
United States since 1868.

The right to exclude any or all classes of aliens is an attribute of
sovereignty. It is a right asserted and, to a limited extent, enforced by the
United States, with the sanction of our highest court. There being no
naturalization treaty between the United States and Turkey, our minister at
Constantinople has been instructed that, while recognizing the right of that
Government to enforce its declared policy against naturalized Armenians, he is
expected to protect them from unnecessary harshness of treatment.

In view of the impaired financial resources of Venezuela consequent upon the
recent revolution there, a modified arrangement for the satisfaction of the
awards of the late revisory claims commission, in progressive installments,
has been assented to, and payments are being regularly made thereunder.

The boundary dispute between Venezuela and British Guiana is yet unadjusted. A
restoration of diplomatic intercourse between that Republic and Great Britain
and reference of the question to impartial arbitration would be a most
gratifying consummation.

The ratification by Venezuela of the convention for the arbitration of the
long-deferred claim of the Venezuelan Transportation Company is awaited.

It is hardly necessary for me to state that the questions arising from our
relations with Hawaii have caused serious embarrassment. Just prior to the
installation of the present Administration the existing Government of Hawaii
had been suddenly overthrown and a treaty of annexation had been negotiated
between the Provisional Government of the islands and the United States and
submitted to the Senate for ratification. This treaty I withdrew for
examination and dispatched Hon. James H. Blount, of Georgia, to Honolulu as a
special commissioner to make an impartial investigation of the circumstances
attending the change of government and of all the conditions bearing upon the
subject of the treaty. After a thorough and exhaustive examination Mr. Blount
submitted to me his report, showing beyond all question that the
constitutional Government of Hawaii had been subverted with the active aid of
our representative to that Government and through the intimidation caused by
the presence of an armed naval force of the United States, which was landed
for that purpose at the instance of our minister. Upon the facts developed it
seemed to me the only honorable course for our Government to pursue was to
undo the wrong that had been done by those representing us and to restore as
far as practicable the status existing at the time of our forcible
intervention. With a view of accomplishing this result within the
constitutional limits of executive power, and recognizing all our obligations
and responsibilities growing out of any changed conditions brought about by
our unjustifiable interference, our present minister at Honolulu has received
appropriate instructions to that end. Thus far no information of the
accomplishment of any definite results has been received from him.

Additional advices are soon expected. When received they will be promptly sent
to the Congress, together with all other information at hand, accompanied by a
special Executive message fully detailing all the facts necessary to a
complete understanding of the case and presenting a history of all the
material events leading up to the present situation.

By a concurrent resolution passed by the Senate February 14, 1890, and by the
House of Representatives on the 3d of April following the President was
requested to "invite from time to time, as fit occasions may arise,
negotiations with any government with which the United States has or may have
diplomatic relations, to the end that any differences or disputes arising
between the two governments which can not be adjusted by diplomatic agency may
be referred to arbitration and be peaceably adjusted by such means." April 18,
1890, the International American Conference of Washington by resolution
expressed the wish that all controversies between the republics of America and
the nations of Europe might be settled by arbitration, and recommended that
the government of each nation represented in that conference should
communicate this wish to all friendly powers. A favorable response has been
received from Great Britain in the shape of a resolution adopted by Parliament
July 16 last, cordially sympathizing with the purpose in view and expressing
the hope that Her Majesty's Government will lend ready cooperation to the
Government of the United States upon the basis of the concurrent resolution
above quoted.

It affords me signal pleasure to lay this parliamentary resolution before the
Congress and to express my sincere gratification that the sentiment of two
great and kindred nations is thus authoritatively manifested in favor of the
rational and peaceable settlement of international quarrels by honorable
resort to arbitration.

Since the-passage of the act of March 3, 1893, authorizing the President to
raise the grade of our envoys to correspond with the rank in which foreign
countries accredit their agents here, Great Britain, France, Italy, and
Germany have conferred upon their representatives at this capital the title of
ambassador, and I have responded by accrediting the agents of the United
States in those countries with the same title. A like elevation of mission is
announced by Russia, and when made will be similarly met. This step fittingly
comports with the position the United States hold in the family of nations.

During my former Administration I took occasion to recommend a recast of the
laws relating to the consular service, in order that it might become a more
efficient agency in the promotion of the interests it was intended to
subserve. The duties and powers of consuls have been expanded with the growing
requirements of our foreign trade. Discharging important duties affecting our
commerce and American citizens abroad, and in certain countries exercising
judicial functions, these officers should be men of character, intelligence,
and ability.

Upon proof that the legislation of Denmark secures copyright to American
citizens on equal footing with its own, the privileges of our copyright laws
have been extended by proclamation to subjects of that country.

The Secretary of the Treasury reports that the receipts of the Government from
all sources during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1893, amounted to
$461,716,561.94 and its expenditures to $459,374,674.29. There was collected
from customs $205,355,016.73 and from internal revenue $161,027,623.93. Our
dutiable imports amounted to $421,856,711, an increase of $52,453,907 over the
preceding year, and importations free of duty amounted to $444,544,211, a
decrease from the preceding year of $13,455,447. Internal-revenue receipts
exceeded those of the preceding year by $7,147,445.32. The total tax collected
on distilled spirits was $94,720,260.55, on manufactured tobacco
$31,889,711.74, and on fermented liquors $32,548,983.07. We exported
merchandise during the year amounting to $847,665,194, a decrease of
$182,612,954 from the preceding year. The amount of gold exported was larger
than any previous year in the history of the Government, amounting to
$108,680,844, and exceeding the amount exported during the preceding year
by$58,485,517.

The sum paid from the Treasury for sugar bounty was $9,375,130.88, an increase
over the preceding year of $2,033,053.09.

It is estimated upon the basis of present revenue laws that the receipts of
the Government for the year ending June 30, 1894, will be $430,121,365.38 and
its expenditures $458,121,365.28, resulting in a deficiency of $28,000,000.

On the 1st day of November, 1893, the amount of money of all kinds in
circulation, or not included in Treasury holdings, was $1,718,544,682, an
increase for the year of $112,404,947. Estimating our population at 67,426,000
at the time mentioned, the per capita circulation was $25.49. On the same date
there was in the Treasury gold bullion amounting to $96,657,273 and silver
bullion which was purchased at a cost of $126,261,553.

The purchases of silver under the law of July 14, 1890, during the last fiscal
year aggregated 54,008,162.59 fine ounces, which cost $45,531,374.53. The
total amount of silver purchased from the time that law became operative until
the repeal of its purchasing clause, on the 1st day of November, 1893, was
168,674,590.46 fine ounces, which cost $155,930,940.84. Between the 1st day of
March, 1873, and the 1st day of November, 1893, the Government purchased under
all laws 503,003,717 fine ounces of silver, at a cost of $516,622,948. The
silver dollars that have been coined under the act of July 14, 1890, number
36,087,285. The seigniorage arising from such coinage was $6,977,098.39,
leaving on hand in the mints 140,699,760 fine ounces of silver, which cost
$126,758,218.

Our total coinage of all metals during the last fiscal year consisted of
97,280,875 pieces, valued at $43,685,178.80, of which there was $30,038,140 in
gold coin, $5,343,715 in silver dollars, $7,217,220.90 in subsidiary silver
coin, and $1,086,102.90 in minor coins.

During the calendar year 1892 the production of precious metals in the United
States was estimated to be 1,596,375 fine ounces of gold of the commercial and
coinage value of $33,000,000 and 58,000,000 fine ounces of silver of the
bullion or market value of $50,750,000 and of the coinage value of
$74,989,900.

It is estimated that on the 1st day of July, 1893, the metallic stock of money
in the United States, consisting of coin and bullion, amounted to
$1,213,559,169, of which $597,697,685 was gold and $615,861,484 was silver.

One hundred and nineteen national banks were organized during the year ending
October 31, 1893, with a capital of $11,230,000. Forty-six went into voluntary
liquidation and 158 suspended. Sixty-five of the suspended banks were
insolvent, 86 resumed business, and 7 remain in the hands of the bank
examiners, with prospects of speedy resumption. Of the new banks organized, 44
were located in the Eastern States, 41 west of the Mississippi River, and 34
in the Central and Southern States. The total number of national banks in
existence on October 31, 1893, was 3,796, having an aggregate capital of
$695,558,120. The net increase in the circulation of these banks during the
year was $36,886,972.

The recent repeal of the provision of law requiring the purchase of silver
bullion by the Government as a feature of our monetary scheme has made an
entire change in the complexion of our currency affairs. I do not doubt that
the ultimate result of this action will be most salutary and far-reaching. In
the nature of things, however, it is impossible to know at this time precisely
what conditions will be brought about by the change, or what, if any,
supplementary legislation may in the light of such conditions appear to be
essential or expedient. Of course, after the recent financial perturbation,
time is necessary for the reestablishment of business confidence. When,
however, through this restored confidence, the money which has been frightened
into hoarding places is returned to trade and enterprise, a survey of the
situation will probably disclose a safe path leading to a permanently sound
currency, abundantly sufficient to meet every requirement of our increasing
population and business.

In the pursuit of this object we should resolutely turn away from alluring and
temporary expedients, determined to be content with nothing less than a
lasting and comprehensive financial plan. In these circumstances I am
convinced that a reasonable delay in dealing with this subject, instead of
being injurious, will increase the probability of wise action.

The monetary conference which assembled at Brussels upon our invitation was
adjourned to the 30th day of November of the present year. The considerations
just stated and the fact that a definite proposition from us seemed to be
expected upon the reassembling of the conference led me to express a
willingness to have the meeting still further postponed.

It seems to me that it would be wise to give general authority to the
President to invite other nations to such a conference at any time when there
should be a fair prospect of accomplishing an international agreement on the
subject of coinage.

I desire also to earnestly suggest the wisdom of amending the existing
statutes in regard to the issuance of Government bonds. The authority now
vested in the Secretary of the Treasury to issue bonds is not as clear as it
should be, and the bonds authorized are disadvantageous to the Government both
as to the time of their maturity and rate of interest.

The Superintendent of Immigration, through the Secretary of the Treasury,
reports that during the last fiscal year there arrived at our ports 440,793
immigrants. Of these, 1,063 were not permitted to land under the limitations
of the law and 577 were returned to the countries from whence they came by
reason of their having become public charges. The total arrivals were 141,034
less than for the previous year.

The Secretary in his report gives an account of the operation of the
Marine-Hospital Service and of the good work done under its supervision in
preventing the entrance and spread of contagious diseases.

The admonitions of the last two years touching our public health and the
demonstrated danger of the introduction of contagious diseases from foreign
ports have invested the subject of national quarantine with increased
interest. A more general and harmonious system than now exists, acting
promptly and directly everywhere and constantly operating by preventive means
to shield our country from the invasion of disease, and at the same time
having due regard to the rights and duties of local agencies, would, I
believe, add greatly to the safety of our people.

The Secretary of War reports that the strength of the Army on the 30th day of
September last was 25,778 enlisted men and 2,144 officers.

The total expenditures of the Department for the year ending June 30, 1893,
amounted to $51,966,074.89. Of this sum $1,992,581.95 was for salaries and
contingent expenses, $23,377,828.35 for the support of the military
establishment, $6,077,033.18 for miscellaneous objects, and 518,631.41 for
public works. This latter sum includes $15,296,876.46 for river and harbor
improvements and $3,266,141.20 for fortifications and other works of defense.

The total enrollment of the militia of the several States was on the 31st of
October of the current year 112,597 officers and enlisted men. The officers of
the Army detailed for the inspection and instruction of this reserve of our
military force report that increased interest and marked progress are apparent
in the discipline and efficiency of the organization.

Neither Indian outbreaks nor domestic violence have called the Army into
service during the year, and the only active military duty required of it has
been in the Department of Texas, where violations of the neutrality laws of
the United States and Mexico were promptly and efficiently dealt with by the
troops, eliciting the warm approval of the civil and military authorities of
both countries.

The operation of wise laws and the influences of civilization constantly
tending to relieve the country from the dangers of Indian hostilities,
together with the increasing ability of the States, through the efficiency of
the National Guard organizations, to protect their citizens from domestic
violence, lead to the suggestion that the time is fast approaching when there
should be a reorganization of our Army on the lines of the present necessities
of the country. This change contemplates neither increase in number nor added
expense, but a redistribution of the force and an encouragement of measures
tending to greater efficiency among the men and improvement of the service.

The adoption of battalion formations for infantry regiments, the strengthening
of the artillery force, the abandonment of smaller and unnecessary posts, and
the massing of the troops at important and accessible stations all promise to
promote the usefulness of the Army. In the judgment of army officers, with but
few exceptions, the operation of the law forbidding the reenlistment of men
after ten years' service has not proved its wisdom, and while the arguments
that led to its adoption were not without merit the experience of the year
constrains me to join in the recommendation for its repeal.

It is gratifying to note that we have begun to attain completed results in the
comprehensive scheme of seacoast defense and fortification entered upon eight
years ago. A large sum has been already expended, but the cost of maintenance
will be inconsiderable as compared with the expense of construction and
ordnance. At the end of the current calendar year the War Department will have
nine 12-inch guns, twenty 10-inch, and thirty-four 8-inch guns ready to be
mounted on gun lifts and carriages, and seventy-five 12-inch mortars. In
addition to the product of the Army Gun Factory, now completed at Watervliet,
the Government has contracted with private parties for the purchase of one
hundred guns of these calibers, the first of which should be delivered to the
Department for test before July 1, 1894.

The manufacture of heavy ordnance keeps pace with current needs, but to render
these guns available for the purposes they are designed to meet emplacements
must be prepared for them. Progress has been made in this direction, and it is
desirable that Congress by adequate appropriations should provide for the
uninterrupted prosecution of this necessary work.

After much preliminary work and exhaustive examination in accordance with the
requirements of the law, the board appointed to select a magazine rifle of
modern type with which to replace the obsolete Springfield rifle of the
infantry service completed its labors during the last year, and the work of
manufacture is now in progress at the national armory at Springfield. It is
confidently expected that by the end of the current year our infantry will be
supplied with a weapon equal to that of the most progressive armies of the
world.

The work on the projected Chickamauga and Chattanooga National Military Park
has been prosecuted with zeal and judgment, and its opening will be celebrated
during the coming year. Over 9 square miles of the Chickamauga battlefield
have been acquired, 25 miles of roadway have been constructed, and permanent
tablets have been placed at many historical points, while the invitation to
the States to mark the positions of their troops participating in the battle
has been very generally accepted.

The work of locating and preserving the lines of battle at the Gettysburg
battlefield is making satisfactory progress on the plans directed by the last
Congress.

The reports of the Military Academy at West Point and the several schools for
special instruction of officers show marked advance in the education of the
Army and a commendable ambition among its officers to excel in the military
profession and to fit themselves for the highest service to the country.

Under the supervision of Adjutant-General Robert Williams, lately retired, the
Bureau of Military Information has become well established and is performing a
service that will put in possession of the Government in time of war most
valuable information, and at all times serve a purpose of great utility in
keeping the Army advised of the world's progress in all matters pertaining to
the art of war.

The report of the Attorney-General contains the usual summary of the affairs
and proceedings of the Department of Justice for the past year, together with
certain recommendations as to needed legislation on various subjects. I can
not too heartily indorse the proposition that the fee system as applicable to
the compensation of United States attorneys, marshals, clerks of Federal
courts, and United States commissioners should be abolished with as little
delay as possible. It is clearly in the interest of the community that the
business of the courts, both civil and criminal, shall be as small and as
inexpensively transacted as the ends of justice will allow.

The system is therefore thoroughly vicious which makes the compensation of
court officials depend upon the volume of such business, and thus creates a
conflict between a proper execution of the law and private gain, which can not
fail to be dangerous to the rights and freedom of the citizen and an
irresistible temptation to the unjustifiable expenditure of public funds. If
in addition to this reform another was inaugurated which would give to United
States commissioners the final disposition of petty offenses within the grade
of misdemeanors, especially those coming under the internal-revenue laws, a
great advance would be made toward a more decent administration of the
criminal law.

In my first message to Congress, dated December 8, 1885, I strongly
recommended these changes and referred somewhat at length to the evils of the
present system. Since that time the criminal business of the Federal courts
and the expense attending it have enormously increased. The number of criminal
prosecutions pending in the circuit and district courts of the United States
on the 1st day of July, 1885, was 3,808, of which 1,884 were for violations of
the internal-revenue laws, while the number of such prosecutions pending on
the 1st day of July, 1893, was 9,500, of which 4,200 were for violations of
the internal-revenue laws. The expense of the United States courts, exclusive
of judges' salaries, for the year ending July 1, 1885, was $2,874,733.11 and
for the year ending July 1, 1893, $4,528,676.87.

It is therefore apparent that the reasons given in 1885 for a change in the
manner of enforcing the Federal criminal law have gained cogency and strength
by lapse of time.

I also heartily join the Attorney-General in recommending legislation fixing
degrees of the crime of murder within Federal jurisdiction, as has been done
in many of the States; authorizing writs of error on behalf of the Government
in cases where final judgment is rendered against the sufficiency of an
indictment or against the Government upon any other question arising before
actual trial; limiting the right of review in cases of felony punishable only
by fine and imprisonment to the circuit court of appeals, and making speedy
provision for the construction of such prisons and reformatories as may be
necessary for the confinement of United States convicts.

The report of the Postmaster-General contains a detailed statement of the
operations of the Post-Office Department during the last fiscal year and much
interesting information touching this important branch of the public service.

The business of the mails indicates with absolute certainty the condition of
the business of the country, and depression in financial affairs inevitably
and quickly reduces the postal revenues. Therefore a larger discrepancy than
usual between the post-office receipts and expenditures is the expected and
unavoidable result of the distressing stringency which has prevailed
throughout the country during much of the time covered by the
Postmaster-General's report. At a date when better times were anticipated it
was estimated by his predecessor that the deficiency on the 30th day of June,
1893, would be but a little over a million and a half dollars. It amounted,
however, to more than five millions. At the same time and under the influence
of like anticipations estimates were made for the current fiscal year, ending
June 30, 1894, which exhibited a surplus of revenue over expenditures of
$872,245.71; but now, in view of the actual receipts and expenditures during
that part of the current fiscal year already expired, the present
Postmaster-General estimates that at its close instead of a surplus there will
be a deficiency of nearly $8,000,000.

The post-office receipts for the last fiscal year amounted to $75,896,933.16
and its expenditures to $81,074,104.90. This post-office deficiency would
disappear or be immensely decreased if less matter were carried free through
the mails, an item of which is upward of 300 tons of seeds and grain from the
Agricultural Department.

The total number of post-offices in the United States on the 30th day of June,
1893, was 68,403, an increase of 1,284 over the preceding year. Of these,
3,360 were Presidential, an increase in that class of 204 over the preceding
year.

Forty-two free-delivery offices were added during the year to those already
existing, making a total of 610 cities and towns provided with free delivery
on June 30, 1893. Ninety-three other cities and towns are now entitled to this
service under the law, but it has not been accorded them on account of
insufficient funds to meet the expenses of its establishment.

I am decidedly of the opinion that the provisions of the present law permit as
general an introduction of this feature of mail service as is necessary or
justifiable, and that it ought not to be extended to smaller communities than
are now designated.

The expenses of free delivery for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1894, will
be more than $11,000,000, and under legislation now existing there must be a
constant increase in this item of expenditure.

There were 6,401 additions to the domestic money-order offices during the last
fiscal year, being the largest increase in any year since the inauguration of
the system. The total number of these offices at the close of the year was
18,434. There were 13,309,735 money orders issued from these offices, being an
increase over the preceding year of 1,240,293, and the value of these orders
amounted to $127,576,433.65, an increase of $7,509,632.58. There were also
issued during the year postal notes amounting to $12,903,076.73.

During the year 195 international money-order offices were added to those
already provided, making a total of 2,407 in operation on June 30, 1893. The
number of international money orders issued during the year was 1,055,999, an
increase over the preceding year of 72,525, and their value was
$16,341,837.86, an increase of $2,221,506.31. The number of orders paid was
300,917, an increase over the preceding year of 13,503, and their value was
$5,283,375.70, an increase of $94,094.83.

From the foregoing statements it appears that the total issue of money orders
and postal notes for the year amounted to $156,822,348.24.

The number of letters and packages mailed during the year for special delivery
was 3,375,693, an increase over the preceding year of nearly 22 per cent. The
special-delivery stamps used upon these letters and packages amounted to
$337,569.30, and the messengers' fees paid for their delivery amounted to
$256,592.71, leaving a profit to the Government of $80,976.59.

The Railway Mail Service not only adds to the promptness of mail delivery at
all offices, but it is the especial instrumentality which puts the smaller and
way places in the service on an equality in that regard with the larger and
terminal offices. This branch of the postal service has therefore received
much attention from the Postmaster-General, and though it is gratifying to
know that it is in a condition of high efficiency and great usefulness, I am
led to agree with the Postmaster-General that there is room for its further
improvement.

There are now connected to the Post-Office establishment 28,324 employees who
are in the classified service. The head of this great Department gives
conclusive evidence of the value of civil-service reform when, after an
experience that renders his judgment on the subject absolutely reliable, he
expresses the opinion that without the benefit of this system it would be
impossible to conduct the vast business intrusted to him.

I desire to commend as especially worthy of prompt attention the suggestions
of the Postmaster-General relating to a more sensible and business like
organization and a better distribution of responsibility in his Department.

The report of the Secretary of the Navy contains a history of the operations
of his Department during the past year and exhibits a most gratifying
condition of the personnel of our Navy. He presents a satisfactory account of
the progress which has been made in the construction of vessels and makes a
number of recommendations to which attention is especially invited.

During the past six months the demands for cruising vessels have been many and
urgent. There have been revolutions calling for vessels to protect American
interests in Nicaragua, Guatemala, Costa Rica, Honduras, Argentina, and
Brazil, while the condition of affairs in Honolulu has required the constant
presence of one or more ships. With all these calls upon our Navy it became
necessary, in order to make up a sufficient fleet to patrol the Bering Sea
under the modus vivendi agreed upon with Great Britain, to detail to that
service one vessel from the Fish Commission and three from the Revenue Marine.

Progress in the construction of new vessels has not been as rapid as was
anticipated. There have been delays in the completion of unarmored vessels,
but for the most part they have been such as are constantly occurring even in
countries having the largest experience in naval shipbuilding. The most
serious delays, however, have been in the work upon armored ships. The trouble
has been the failure of contractors to deliver armor as agreed. The
difficulties seem now, however, to have been all overcome, and armor is being
delivered with satisfactory promptness. As a result of the experience acquired
by shipbuilders and designers and material men, it is believed that the dates
when vessels will be completed can now be estimated with reasonable accuracy.
Great guns, rapid-fire guns, torpedoes, and powder are being promptly
supplied.

The following vessels of the new Navy have been completed and are now ready
for service: The double-turreted coast-defense monitor Miantonomoh, the
double-turreted coast-defense monitor Monterey, the armored cruiser New York,
the protected cruisers Baltimore, Chicago, Philadelphia, Newark, San
Francisco, Charleston, Atlanta, and Boston, the cruiser Detroit, the gunboats
Yorktown, Concord, Bennington, Machias, Castine, and Petrel, the dispatch
vessel Dolphin, the practice vessel Bancroft, and the dynamite gunboat
Vesuvius. Of these the Bancroft, Machias, Detroit, and Castine have been
placed in commission during the current calendar year.

The following vessels are in process of construction: The second-class battle
ships Maine and Texas, the cruisers Montgomery and Marblehead, and the
coast-defense monitors Terror, Puritan, Amphitrite, and Monadnock, all of
which will be completed within one year; the harbor-defense ram Katahdin and
the protected cruisers Columbia, Minneapolis, Olympia, Cincinnati, and
Raleigh, all of which will be completed prior to July 1, 1895; the first-class
battle ships Iowa, Indiana, Massachusetts, and Oregon, which will be completed
February 1, 1896, and the armored cruiser Brooklyn, which will be completed by
August 1 of that year. It is also expected that the three gunboats authorized
by the last Congress will be completed in less than two years.

Since 1886 Congress has at each session authorized the building of one or more
vessels, and the Secretary of the Navy presents an earnest plea for the
continuance of this plan. He recommends the authorization of at least one
battle ship and six torpedo boats.

While I am distinctly in favor of consistently pursuing the policy we have
inaugurated of building up a thorough and efficient Navy, I can not refrain
from the suggestion that the Congress should carefully take into account the
number of unfinished vessels on our hands and the depleted condition of our
Treasury in considering the propriety of an appropriation at this time to
begin new work.

The method of employing mechanical labor at navy-yards through boards of labor
and making efficiency the sole test by which laborers are employed and
continued is producing the best results, and the Secretary is earnestly
devoting himself to its development. Attention is invited to the statements of
his report in regard to the workings of the system.

The Secretary of the Interior has the supervision of so many important
subjects that his report is of especial value and interest.

On the 30th day of June, 1893, there were on the pension rolls 966,012 names,
an increase of 89,944 over the number on the rolls June 30, 1892. Of these
there were 17 widows and daughters of Revolutionary soldiers, 86 survivors of
the War of 1812, 5,425 widows of soldiers of that war, 21,518 survivors and
widows of the Mexican War, 3,882 survivors and widows of Indian wars, 284 army
nurses. and 475,645 survivors and widows and children of deceased soldiers and
sailors of the War of the Rebellion. The latter number represents those
pensioned on account of disabilities or death resulting from army and navy
service. The number of persons remaining on the rolls June 30, 1893, who were
pensioned under the act of June 27, 1890, which allows pensions on account of
death and disability not chargeable to army service, was 459,155.

The number added to the rolls during the year was 123,634 and the number
dropped was 33,690. The first payments on pensions allowed during the year
amounted to $33,756,549.98. This includes arrears, or the accumulation between
the time from which the allowance of pension dates and the time of actually
granting the certificate.

Although the law of 1890 permits pensions for disabilities not related to
military service, yet as a requisite to its benefits a disability must exist
incapacitating applicants "from the performance of manual labor to such a
degree as to render them unable to earn a support." The execution of this law
in its early stages does not seem to have been in accord with its true
intention, but toward the close of the last Administration an authoritative
construction was given to the statute, and since that time this construction
has been followed. This has had the effect of limiting the operation of the
law to its intended purpose. The discovery having been made that many names
had been put upon the pension roll by means of wholesale and gigantic frauds,
the Commissioner suspended payments upon a number of pensions which seemed to
be fraudulent or unauthorized pending a complete examination, giving notice to
the pensioners, in order that they might have an opportunity to establish, if
possible, the justice of their claims notwithstanding apparent invalidity.

This, I understand, is the practice which has for a long time prevailed in the
Pension Bureau; but after entering upon these recent investigations the
Commissioner modified this rule so as not to allow until after a complete
examination interference with the payment of a pension apparently not
altogether void, but which merely had been fixed at a rate higher than that
authorized by law.

I am unable to understand why frauds in the pension rolls should not be
exposed and corrected with thoroughness and vigor. Every name fraudulently put
upon these rolls is a wicked imposition upon the kindly sentiment in which
pensions have their origin; every fraudulent pensioner has become a bad
citizen; every false oath in support of a pension has made perjury more
common, and false and undeserving pensioners rob the people not only of their
money, but of the patriotic sentiment which the survivors of a war fought for
the preservation of the Union ought to inspire. Thousands of neighborhoods
have their well-known fraudulent pensioners, and recent developments by the
Bureau establish appalling conspiracies to accomplish pension frauds. By no
means the least wrong done is to brave and deserving pensioners, who certainly
ought not to be condemned to such association.

Those who attempt in the line of duty to rectify these wrongs should not be
accused of enmity or indifference to the claims of honest veterans. The sum
expended on account of pensions for the year ending June 30, 1893, was
$156,740,467.14.

The Commissioner estimates that $165,000,000 will be required to pay pensions
during the year ending June 30, 1894.

The condition of the Indians and their ultimate fate are subjects which are
related to a sacred duty of the Government and which strongly appeal to the
sense of justice and the sympathy of our people.

Our Indians number about 248,000. Most of them are located on 161
reservations, containing 86,116,531 acres of land. About 110,000 of these
Indians have to a large degree adopted civilized customs. Lands in severalty
have been allotted to many of them. Such allotments have been made to 10,000
individuals during the last fiscal year, embracing about 1,000,000 acres. The
number of Indian Government schools opened during the year was 195, an
increase of 12 over the preceding year. Of this total 170 were on
reservations, of which 73 were boarding schools and 97 were day schools.
Twenty boarding schools and 5 day schools supported by the Government were not
located on reservations. The total number of Indian children enrolled during
the year as attendants of all schools was 21,138, an increase of 1,231 over
the enrollment for the previous year.

I am sure that secular education and moral and religious teaching must be
important factors in any effort to save the Indian and lead him to
civilization. I believe, too, that the relinquishment of tribal relations and
the holding of land in severalty may in favorable conditions aid this
consummation. It seems to me, however, that allotments of land in severalty
ought to be made with great care and circumspection. If hastily done, before
the Indian knows its meaning, while yet he has little or no idea of tilling a
farm and no conception of thrift, there is great danger that a reservation
life in tribal relations may be exchanged for the pauperism of civilization
instead of its independence and elevation.

The solution of the Indian problem depends very largely upon good
administration. The personal fitness of agents and their adaptability to the
peculiar duty of caring for their wards are of the utmost importance.

The law providing that, except in special cases, army officers shall be
detailed as Indian agents it is hoped will prove a successful experiment.

There is danger of great abuses creeping into the prosecution of claims for
Indian depredations, and I recommend that every possible safeguard be provided
against the enforcement of unjust and fictitious claims of this description.

The appropriations on account of the Indian Bureau for the year ending June
30, 1894, amount to $7,954,962.99, a decrease as compared with the year
preceding it of $387,131.95.

The vast area of land which but a short time ago constituted the public domain
is rapidly falling into private hands. It is certain that in the transfer the
beneficent intention of the Government to supply from its domain homes to the
industrious and worthy home seekers is often frustrated. Though the
speculator, who stands with extortionate purpose between the land office and
those who, with their families, are invited by the Government to settle on the
public lands, is a despicable character who ought not to be tolerated, yet it
is difficult to thwart his schemes. The recent opening to settlement of the
lands in the Cherokee Outlet, embracing an area of 6,500,000 acres,
notwithstanding the utmost care in framing the regulations governing the
selection of locations and notwithstanding the presence of United States
troops, furnished an exhibition, though perhaps in a modified degree, of the
mad scramble, the violence, and the fraudulent occupation which have
accompanied previous openings of public land.

I concur with the Secretary in the belief that these outrageous incidents can
not be entirely prevented without a change in the laws on the subject, and I
hope his recommendations in that direction will be favorably considered.

I especially commend to the attention of the Congress the statements contained
in the Secretary's report concerning forestry. The time has come when
efficient measures should be taken for the preservation of our forests from
indiscriminate and remediless destruction.

The report of the Secretary of Agriculture will be found exceedingly
interesting, especially to that large part of our citizens intimately
concerned in agricultural occupations.

On the 7th day of March, 1893, there were upon its pay rolls 2,430 employees.
This number has been reduced to 1,850 persons. In view of a depleted public
Treasury and the imperative demand of the people for economy in the
administration of their Government, the Secretary has entered upon the task of
rationally reducing expenditures by the elimination from the pay rolls of all
persons not needed for an efficient conduct of the affairs of the Department.

During the first quarter of the present year the expenses of the Department
aggregated $345,876.76, as against $402,012.42 for the corresponding period of
the fiscal year ending June 30, 1893. The Secretary makes apparent his
intention to continue this rate of reduction by submitting estimates for the
next fiscal year less by $994,280 than those for the present year.

Among the heads of divisions in this Department the changes have been
exceedingly few. Three vacancies occurring from death and resignations have
been filled by the promotion of assistants in the same divisions.

These promotions of experienced and faithful assistants have not only been in
the interest of efficient work, but have suggested to those in the Department
who look for retention and promotion that merit and devotion to duty are their
best reliance.

The amount appropriated for the Bureau of Animal Industry for the current
fiscal year is $850,000. The estimate for the ensuing year is $700,000.

The regulations of 1892 concerning Texas fever have been enforced during the
last year and the large stock yards of the country have been kept free from
infection. Occasional local outbreaks have been largely such as could have
been effectually guarded against by the owners of the affected cattle.

While contagious pleuro-pneumonia in cattle has been eradicated, animal
tuberculosis, a disease widespread and more dangerous to human life than
pleuro-pneumonia, is still prevalent. Investigations have been made during the
past year as to the means of its communication and the method of its correct
diagnosis. Much progress has been made in this direction by the studies of the
division of animal pathology, but work ought to be extended, in cooperation
with local authorities, until the danger to human life arising from this cause
is reduced to a minimum.

The number of animals arriving from Canada during the year and inspected by
Bureau officers was 462,092, and the number from transatlantic countries was
1,297. No contagious diseases were found among the imported animals.

The total number of inspections of cattle for export during the past fiscal
year was 611,542. The exports show a falling off of about 25 per cent from the
preceding year, the decrease occurring entirely in the last half of the year.
This suggests that the falling off may have been largely due to an increase in
the price of American export cattle.

During the year ending June 30, 1893, exports of inspected pork aggregated
10,677,410 pounds, as against 38,152,874 pounds for the preceding year. The
falling off in this export was not confined, however, to inspected pork, the
total quantity exported for 1892 being 665,490,616 pounds, while in 1893 it
was only 527,308,695 pounds.

I join the Secretary in recommending that hereafter each applicant for the
position of inspector or assistant inspector in the Bureau of Animal Industry
be required, as a condition precedent to his appointment, to exhibit to the
United States Civil Service Commission his diploma from an established,
regular, and reputable veterinary college, and that this be supplemented by
such an examination in veterinary science as the Commission may prescribe.

The exports of agricultural products from the United States for the fiscal
year ending June 30, 1892, attained the enormous figure of $800,000,000, in
round numbers, being 78.7 per cent of our total exports. In the last fiscal
year this aggregate was greatly reduced, but nevertheless reached 615,000,000,
being 75.1 per cent of all American commodities exported.

A review of our agricultural exports with special reference to their
destination will show that in almost every line the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Ireland absorbs by far the largest proportion. Of cattle the total
exports aggregated in value for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1893,
$26,000,000, of which Great Britain took considerably over $25,000,000. Of
beef products of all kinds our total exports were $28,000,000, of which Great
Britain took $24,000,000. Of pork products the total exports were $84,000,000,
of which Great Britain took $53,000,000. In breadstuffs, cotton, and minor
products like proportions sent to the same destination are shown.

The work of the statistical division of the Department of Agriculture deals
with all that relates to the economics of farming.

The main purpose of its monthly reports is to keep the farmers informed as
fully as possible of all matters having any influence upon the world's
markets, in which their products find sale. Its publications relate especially
to the commercial side of farming.

It is therefore of profound importance and vital concern to the farmers of the
United States, who represent nearly one-half of our population, and also of
direct interest to the whole country, that the work of this division be
efficiently performed and that the information it has gathered be promptly
diffused.

It is a matter for congratulation to know that the Secretary will not spare
any effort to make this part of his work thoroughly useful.

In the year 1839 the Congress appropriated $1,000, to be taken from the Patent
Office funds, for the purpose of collecting and distributing rare and improved
varieties of seeds and for prosecuting agricultural investigations and
procuring agricultural statistics. From this small beginning the seed division
of the Department of Agriculture has grown to its present unwieldy and
unjustifiably extravagant proportions.

During the last fiscal year the cost of seeds purchased was $66,548.61. The
remainder of an appropriation of $135,000 was expended in putting them up and
distributing them. It surely never could have entered the minds of those who
first sanctioned appropriations of public money for the purchase of new and
improved varieties of seeds for gratuitous distribution that from this would
grow large appropriations for the purchase and distribution by members of
Congress of ordinary seeds, bulbs, and cuttings which are common in all the
States and Territories and everywhere easily obtainable at low prices.

In each State and Territory an agricultural experiment station has been
established. These stations, by their very character and name, are the proper
agencies to experiment with and test new varieties of seeds; and yet this
indiscriminate and wasteful distribution by legislation and legislators
continues, answering no purpose unless it be to remind constituents that their
representatives are willing to remember them with gratuities at public cost.

Under the sanction of existing legislation there was sent out from the
Agricultural Department during the last fiscal year enough of cabbage seed to
plant 19,200 acres of land, a sufficient quantity of beans to plant 4,000
acres, beet seed enough to plant 2,500 acres, sweet corn enough to plant 7,800
acres, sufficient cucumber seed to cover 2,025 acres with vines, and enough
muskmelon and watermelon seeds to plant 2,675 acres. The total quantity of
flower and vegetable seeds thus distributed was contained in more than
9,000,000 packages, and they were sufficient if planted to cover 89,596 acres
of land.

In view of these facts this enormous expenditure without legitimate returns of
benefit ought to be abolished. Anticipating a consummation so manifestly in
the interest of good administration, more than $100,000 has been stricken from
the estimate made to cover this object for the year ending June 30, 1895; and
the Secretary recommends that the remaining $35,000 of the estimate be
confined strictly to the purchase of new and improved varieties of seeds, and
that these be distributed through experiment stations.

Thus the seed will be tested, and after the test has been completed by the
experiment station the propagation of the useful varieties and the rejection
of the valueless may safely be left to the common sense of the people.

The continued intelligent execution of the civil-service law and the
increasing approval by the people of its operation are most gratifying. The
recent extension of its limitations and regulations to the employees at
free-delivery post-offices, which has been honestly and promptly accomplished
by the Commission, with the hearty cooperation of the Postmaster-General, is
an immensely important advance in the usefulness of the system.

I am, if possible, more than ever convinced of the incalculable benefits
conferred by the civil-service law, not only in its effect upon the public
service, but also, what is even more important, in its effect in elevating the
tone of political life generally.

The course of civil-service reform in this country instructively and
interestingly illustrates how strong a hold a movement gains upon our people
which has underlying it a sentiment of justice and right and which at the same
time promises better administration of their Government.

The law embodying this reform found its way to our statute book more from fear
of the popular sentiment existing in its favor than from any love for the
reform itself on the part of legislators, and it has lived and grown and
flourished in spite of the covert as well as open hostility of spoilsmen and
notwithstanding the querulous impracticability of many self-constituted
guardians. Beneath all the vagaries and sublimated theories which are
attracted to it there underlies this reform a sturdy common-sense principle
not only suited to this mundane sphere, but whose application our people are
more and more recognizing to be absolutely essential to the most successful
operation of their Government, if not to its perpetuity.

It seems to me to be entirely inconsistent with the character of this reform,
as well as with its best enforcement, to oblige the Commission to rely for
clerical assistance upon clerks detailed from other Departments. There ought
not to be such a condition in any Department that clerks hired to do work
there can be spared to habitually work at another place, and it does not
accord with a sensible view of civil-service reform that persons should be
employed on the theory that their labor is necessary in one Department when in
point of fact their services are devoted to entirely different work in another
Department.

I earnestly urge that the clerks necessary to carry on the work of the
Commission be regularly put upon its roster and that the system of obliging
the Commissioners to rely upon the services of clerks belonging to other
Departments be discontinued. This ought not to increase the expense to the
Government, while it would certainly be more consistent and add greatly to the
efficiency of the Commission.

Economy in public expenditure is a duty that can not innocently be neglected
by those intrusted with the control of money drawn from the people for public
uses. It must be confessed that our apparently endless resources, the
familiarity of our people with immense accumulations of wealth, the growing
sentiment among them that the expenditure of public money should in some
manner be to their immediate and personal advantage, the indirect and almost
stealthy manner in which a large part of our taxes is exacted, and a
degenerated sense of official accountability have led to growing extravagance
in governmental appropriations.

At this time, when a depleted public Treasury confronts us, when many of our
people are engaged in a hard struggle for the necessaries of life, and when
enforced economy is pressing upon the great mass of our countrymen, I desire
to urge with all the earnestness at my command that Congressional legislation
be so limited by strict economy as to exhibit an appreciation of the condition
of the Treasury and a sympathy with the straitened circumstances of our
fellow-citizens.

The duty of public economy is also of immense importance in its intimate and
necessary relation to the task now in hand of providing revenue to meet
Government expenditures and yet reducing the people's burden of Federal
taxation.

After a hard struggle tariff reform is directly before us. Nothing so
important claims our attention and nothing so clearly presents itself as both
an opportunity and a duty--an opportunity to deserve the gratitude of our
fellow-citizens and a duty imposed upon us by our oft-repeated professions and
by the emphatic mandate of the people. After full discussion our countrymen
have spoken in favor of this reform, and they have confided the work of its
accomplishment to the hands of those who are solemnly pledged to it.

If there is anything in the theory of a representation in public places of the
people and their desires, if public officers are really the servants of the
people, and if political promises and professions have any binding force, our
failure to give the relief so long awaited will be sheer recreancy. Nothing
should intervene to distract our attention or disturb our effort until this
reform is accomplished by wise and careful legislation.

While we should stanchly adhere to the principle that only the necessity of
revenue justifies the imposition of tariff duties and other Federal taxation
and that they should be limited by strict economy, we can not close our eyes
to the fact that conditions have grown up among us which in justice and
fairness call for discriminating care in the distribution of such duties and
taxation as the emergencies of our Government actually demand.

Manifestly if we are to aid the people directly through tariff reform, one of
its most obvious features should be a reduction in present tariff charges upon
the necessaries of life. The benefits of such a reduction would be palpable
and substantial, seen and felt by thousands who would be better fed and better
clothed and better sheltered. These gifts should be the willing benefactions
of a Government whose highest function is the promotion of the welfare of the
people.

Not less closely related to our people's prosperity and well-being is the
removal of restrictions upon the importation of the raw materials necessary to
our manufactures. The world should be open to our national ingenuity and
enterprise. This can not be while Federal legislation through the imposition
of high tariff forbids to American manufacturers as cheap materials as those
used by their competitors. It is quite obvious that the .enhancement of the
price of our manufactured products resulting from this policy not only
confines the market for these products within our own borders, to the direct
disadvantage of our manufacturers, but also increases their cost to our
citizens.

The interests of labor are certainly, though indirectly, involved in this
feature of our tariff system. The sharp competition and active struggle among
our manufacturers to supply the limited demand for their goods soon fill the
narrow market to which they are confined. Then follows a suspension of work in
mills and factories, a discharge of employees, and distress in the homes of
our workingmen.

Even if the often-disproved assertion could be made good that a lower rate of
wages would result from free raw materials and low tariff duties, the
intelligence of our workmen leads them quickly to discover that their steady
employment, permitted by free raw materials, is the most important factor in
their relation to tariff legislation.

A measure has been prepared by the appropriate Congressional committee
embodying tariff reform on the lines herein suggested, which will be promptly
submitted for legislative action. It is the result of much patriotic and
unselfish work, and I believe it deals with its subject consistently and as
thoroughly as existing conditions permit.

I am satisfied that the reduced tariff duties provided for in the proposed
legislation, added to existing internal-revenue taxation, will in the near
future, though perhaps not immediately, produce sufficient revenue to meet the
needs of the Government.

The committee, after full consideration and to provide against a temporary
deficiency which may exist before the business of the country adjusts itself
to the new tariff schedules, have wisely embraced in their plan a few
additional internal-revenue taxes, including a small tax upon incomes derived
from certain corporate investments.

These new adjustments are not only absolutely just and easily borne, but they
have the further merit of being such as can be remitted without unfavorable
business disturbance whenever the necessity of their imposition no longer
exists.

In my great desire for the success of this measure I can not restrain the
suggestion that its success can only be attained by means of unselfish counsel
on the part of the friends of tariff reform and as a result of their
willingness to subordinate personal desires and ambitions to the general good.
The local interests affected by the proposed reform are so numerous and so
varied that if all are insisted upon the legislation embodying the reform must
inevitably fail.

In conclusion my intense feeling of responsibility impels me to invoke for the
manifold interests of a generous and confiding people the most scrupulous care
and to pledge my willing support to every legislative effort for the
advancement of the greatness and prosperity of our beloved country.

GROVER CLEVELAND

1894:
To the Congress of the United States:

The assemblage within the nation's legislative halls of those charged with the
duty of making laws for the benefit of a generous and free people impressively
suggests the exacting obligation and inexorable responsibility involved in
their task. At the threshold of such labor now to be undertaken by the
Congress of the United States, and in the discharge of an executive duty
enjoined by the Constitution, I submit this communication, containing a brief
statement of the condition of our national affairs and recommending such
legislation as seems to me necessary and expedient.

The history of our recent dealings with other nations and our peaceful
relations with them at this time additionally demonstrate the advantage of
consistently adhering to a firm but just foreign policy, free from envious or
ambitious national schemes and characterized by entire honesty and sincerity.

During the past year, pursuant to a law of Congress, commissioners were
appointed to the Antwerp Industrial Exposition. Though the participation of
American exhibitors fell far short of completely illustrating our national
ingenuity and industrial achievements, yet it was quite creditable in view of
the brief time allowed for preparation.

I have endeavored to impress upon the Belgian Government the heedlessness and
positive harmfulness of its restrictions upon the importation of certain of
our food products, and have strongly urged that the rigid supervision and
inspection under our laws are amply sufficient to prevent the exportation from
this country of diseased cattle and unwholesome meat.

The termination of the civil war in Brazil has been followed by the general
prevalence of peace and order. It appearing at an early stage of the
insurrection that its course would call for unusual watchfulness on the part
of this Government, our naval force in the harbor of Rio de Janeiro was
strengthened. This precaution, I am satisfied, tended to restrict the issue to
a simple trial of strength between the Brazilian Government and the insurgents
and to avert complications which at times seemed imminent. Our firm attitude
of neutrality was maintained to the end. The insurgents received no
encouragement of eventual asylum from our commanders, and such opposition as
they encountered was for the protection of our commerce and was clearly
justified by public law.

A serious tension of relations having arisen at the close of the war between
Brazil and Portugal by reason of the escape of the insurgent admiral Da Gama
and his followers, the friendly offices of our representatives to those
countries were exerted for the protection of the subjects of either within the
territory of the other.

Although the Government of Brazil was duly notified that the commercial
arrangement existing between the United States and that country based on the
third section of the tariff act of 1890 was abrogated on August 28, 1894, by
the taking effect of the tariff law now in force, that Government subsequently
notified us of its intention to terminate such arrangement on the 1st day of
January, 1895, in the exercise of the right reserved in the agreement between
the two countries. I invite attention to the correspondence between the
Secretary of State and the Brazilian minister on this subject.

The commission organized under the convention which we had entered into with
Chile for the settlement of the outstanding claims of each Government against
the other adjourned at the end of the period stipulated for its continuance
leaving undetermined a number of American cases which had been duly presented.
These claims are not barred, and negotiations are in progress for their
submission to a new tribunal.

On the 17th of March last a new treaty with China in further regulation of
emigration was signed at Washington, and on August 13 it received the sanction
of the Senate. Ratification on the part of China and formal exchange are
awaited to give effect to this mutually beneficial convention.

A gratifying recognition of the uniform impartiality of this country toward
all foreign states was manifested by the coincident request of the Chinese and
Japanese Governments that the agents of the United States should within proper
limits afford protection to the subjects of the other during the suspension of
diplomatic relations due to a state of war. This delicate office was accepted,
and a misapprehension which gave rise to the belief that in affording this
kindly unofficial protection our agents would exercise the same authority
which the withdrawn agents of the belligerents had exercised was promptly
corrected. Although the war between China and Japan endangers no policy of the
United States, it deserves our gravest consideration by reason of its
disturbance of our growing commercial interests in the two countries and the
increased dangers which may result to our citizens domiciled or sojourning in
the interior of China.

Acting under a stipulation in our treaty with Korea (the first concluded with
a western power), I felt constrained at the beginning of the controversy to
tender our good offices to induce an amicable arrangement of the initial
difficulty growing out of the Japanese demands for administrative reforms in
Korea, but the unhappy precipitation of actual hostilities defeated this
kindly purpose.

Deploring the destructive war between the two most powerful of the eastern
nations and anxious that our commercial interests in those countries may be
preserved and that the safety of our citizens there shall not be jeopardized,
I would not hesitate to heed any intimation that our friendly aid for the
honorable termination of hostilities would be acceptable to both belligerents.

A convention has been finally concluded for the settlement by arbitration of
the prolonged dispute with Ecuador growing out of the proceedings against
Emilio Santos, a naturalized citizen of the United States.

Our relations with the Republic of France continue to be such as should exist
between nations so long bound together by friendly sympathy and similarity in
their form of government.

The recent cruel assassination of the President of this sister Republic called
forth such universal expressions of sorrow and condolence from our people and
Government as to leave no doubt of the depth and sincerity of our attachment.
The resolutions passed by the Senate and House of Representatives on the
occasion have been communicated to the widow of President Carnot.

Acting upon the reported discovery of Texas fever in cargoes of American
cattle, the German prohibition against importations of live stock and fresh
meats from this country has been revived. It is hoped that Germany will soon
become convinced that the inhibition is as needless as it is harmful to mutual
interests.

The German Government has protested against that provision of the customs
tariff act which imposes a discriminating duty of one-tenth of 1 cent a pound
on sugars coming from countries paying an export bounty thereon, claiming that
the exaction of such duty is in contravention of Articles V and IX of the
treaty of 1828 with Prussia.

In the interests of the commerce of both countries and to avoid even the
accusation of treaty violation, I recommend the repeal of so much of the
statute as imposes that duty, and I invite attention to the accompanying
report of the Secretary of State, containing a discussion of the questions
raised by the German protests.

Early in the present year an agreement was reached with Great Britain
concerning instructions to be given to the naval commanders of the two
Governments in Bering Sea and the contiguous North Pacific Ocean for their
guidance in the execution of the award of the Paris Tribunal of Arbitration
and the enforcement of the regulations therein prescribed for the protection
of seal life in the waters mentioned. An understanding has also been reached
for the payment by the United States of

$425,000 in full satisfaction of all claims which may be made by Great Britain
for damages growing out of the controversy as to fur seals in Bering Sea or
the seizure of British vessels engaged in taking seal in those waters. The
award and findings of the Paris Tribunal to a great extent determined the
facts and principles upon which these claims should be adjusted, and they have
been subjected by both Governments to a thorough examination upon the
principles as well as the facts which they involve. I am convinced that a
settlement upon the terms mentioned would be an equitable and advantageous
one, and I recommend that provision be made for the prompt payment of the
stated sum.

Thus far only France and Portugal have signified their willingness to adhere
to the regulations established under the award of the Paris Tribunal of
Arbitration.

Preliminary surveys of the Alaskan boundary and a preparatory examination of
the question of protection of food fish in the contiguous waters of the United
States and the Dominion of Canada are in progress.

The boundary of British Guiana still remains in dispute between Great Britain
and Venezuela. Believing that its early settlement on some just basis alike
honorable to both parties is in the line of our established policy to remove
from this hemisphere all causes of difference with powers beyond the sea, I
shall renew the efforts heretofore made to bring about a restoration of
diplomatic relations between the disputants and to induce a reference to
arbitration--a resort which Great Britain so conspicuously favors in principle
and respects in practice and which is earnestly sought by her weaker
adversary.

Since communicating the voluminous correspondence in regard to Hawaii and the
action taken by the Senate and House of Representatives on certain questions
submitted to the judgment and wider discretion of Congress the organization of
a government in place of the provisional arrangement which followed the
deposition of the Queen has been announced, with evidence of its effective
operation. The recognition usual in such cases has been accorded the new
Government.

Under our present treaties of extradition with Italy miscarriages of justice
have occurred owing to the refusal of that Government to surrender its own
subjects. Thus far our efforts to negotiate an amended convention obviating
this difficulty have been unavailing.

Apart from the war in which the Island Empire is engaged, Japan attracts
increasing attention in this country by her evident desire to cultivate more
liberal intercourse with us and to seek our kindly aid in furtherance of her
laudable desire for complete autonomy in her domestic affairs and full
equality in the family of nations. The Japanese Empire of to-day is no longer
the Japan of the past, and our relations with this progressive nation should
not be less broad and liberal than those with other powers.

Good will, fostered by many interests in common, has marked our relations with
our nearest southern neighbor. Peace being restored along her northern
frontier, Mexico has asked the punishment of the late disturbers of her
tranquillity. There ought to be a new treaty of commerce and navigation with
that country to take the place of the one which terminated thirteen years ago.
The friendliness of the intercourse between the two countries is attested by
the fact that during this long period the commerce of each has steadily
increased under the rule of mutual consideration, being neither stimulated by
conventional arrangements nor retarded by jealous rivalries or selfish
distrust.

An indemnity tendered by Mexico as a gracious act for the murder in 1887 of
Leon Baldwin, an American citizen, by a band of marauders in Durango has been
accepted and is being paid in installments.

The problem of the storage and use of the waters of the Rio Grande for
irrigation should be solved by appropriate concurrent action of the two
interested countries. Rising in the Colorado heights, the stream flows
intermittently, yielding little water during the dry months to the irrigation
channels already constructed along its course. This scarcity is often severely
felt in the regions where the river forms a common boundary. Moreover, the
frequent changes in its course through level sands often raise embarrassing
questions of territorial jurisdiction.

Prominent among the questions of the year was the Bluefields incident, in what
is known as the Mosquito Indian Strip, bordering on the Atlantic Ocean and
within the jurisdiction of Nicaragua. By the treaty of 1860 between Great
Britain and Nicaragua the former Government expressly recognized the
sovereignty of the latter over the strip, and a limited form of
self-government was guaranteed to the Mosquito Indians, to be exercised
according to their customs, for themselves and other dwellers within its
limits. The so-called native government, which grew to be largely made up of
aliens, for many years disputed the sovereignty of Nicaragua over the strip
and claimed the right to maintain therein a practically independent municipal
government. Early in the past year efforts of Nicaragua to maintain
sovereignty over the Mosquito territory led to serious disturbances,
culminating in the suppression of the native government and the attempted
substitution of an impracticable composite administration in which Nicaragua
and alien residents were to participate. Failure was followed by an
insurrection, which for a time subverted Nicaraguan rule, expelling her
officers and restoring the old organization. This in turn gave place to the
existing local government established and upheld by Nicaragua.

Although the alien interests arrayed against Nicaragua in these transactions
have been largely American and the commerce of that region for some time has
been and still is chiefly controlled by our citizens, we can not for that
reason challenge the rightful sovereignty of Nicaragua over this important
part of her domain.

For some months one, and during part of the time two, of our naval ships have
been stationed at Bluefields for the protection of all legitimate interests of
our citizens. In September last the Government at Managua expelled from its
territory twelve or more foreigners, including two Americans, for alleged
participation in the seditious or revolutionary movements against the Republic
at Bluefields already mentioned; but through the earnest remonstrance of this
Government the two Americans have been permitted to return to the peaceful
management of their business. Our naval commanders at the scene of these
disturbances by their constant exhibition of firmness and good judgment
contributed largely to the prevention of more serious consequences and to the
restoration of quiet and order. I regret that in the midst of these
occurrences there happened a most grave and irritating failure of Nicaraguan
justice. An American citizen named Wilson, residing at Rama, in the Mosquito
territory, was murdered by one Arguello, the acting governor of the town.
After some delay the murderer was arrested, but so insecurely confined or
guarded that he escaped, and notwithstanding our repeated demands it is
claimed that his recapture has been impossible by reason of his flight beyond
Nicaraguan jurisdiction.

The Nicaraguan authorities, having given notice of forfeiture of their
concession to the canal company on grounds purely technical and not embraced
in the contract, have receded from that position.

Peru, I regret to say, shows symptoms of domestic disturbance, due probably to
the slowness of her recuperation from the distresses of the war of 1881.
Weakened in resources, her difficulties in facing international obligations
invite our kindly sympathy and justify our forbearance in pressing
long-pending claims. I have felt constrained to testify this sympathy in
connection with certain demands urgently preferred by other powers.

The recent death of the Czar of Russia called forth appropriate expressions of
sorrow and sympathy on the part of our Government with his bereaved family and
the Russian people. As a further demonstration of respect and friendship our
minister at St. Petersburg was directed to represent our Government at the
funeral ceremonies.

The sealing interests of Russia in Bering Sea are second only to our own. A
modus vivendi has therefore been concluded with the Imperial Government
restrictive of poaching on the Russian rookeries and of sealing in waters
which were not comprehended in the protected area defined in the Paris award.

Occasion has been found to urge upon the Russian Government equality of
treatment for our great life-insurance companies whose operations have been
extended throughout Europe. Admitting as we do foreign corporations to
transact business in the United States, we naturally expect no less tolerance
for our own in the ample fields of competition abroad.

But few cases of interference with naturalized citizens returning to Russia
have been reported during the current year. One Krzeminski was arrested last
summer in a Polish province on a reported charge of unpermitted renunciation
of Russian allegiance, but it transpired that the proceedings originated in
alleged malfeasance committed by Krzeminski while an imperial official a
number of years ago. Efforts for his release, which promised to be successful,
were in progress when his death was reported.

The Government of Salvador having been overthrown by an abrupt popular
outbreak, certain of its military and civil officers, while hotly pursued by
infuriated insurgents, sought refuge on board the United States war ship
Bennington, then lying in a Salvadorean port. Although the practice of asylum
is not favored by this Government, yet in view of the imminent peril which
threatened the fugitives and solely from considerations of humanity they were
afforded shelter by our naval commander, and when afterwards demanded under
our treaty of extradition with Salvador for trial on charges of murder, arson,
and robbery I directed that such of them as had not voluntarily left the ship
be conveyed to one of our nearest ports where a hearing could be had before a
judicial officer, in compliance with the terms of the treaty. On their arrival
at San Francisco such a proceeding was promptly instituted before the United
States district judge, who held that the acts constituting the alleged
offenses were political and discharged all the accused except one Cienfuegos,
who was held for an attempt to murder. Thereupon I was constrained to direct
his release for the reason that an attempt to murder was not one of the crimes
charged against him and upon which his surrender to the Salvadorean
authorities had been demanded.

Unreasonable and unjust fines imposed by Spain on the vessels and commerce of
the United States have demanded from time to time during the last twenty years
earnest remonstrance on the part of our Government. In the immediate past
exorbitant penalties have been imposed upon our vessels and goods by customs
authorities of Cuba and Puerto Rico for clerical errors of the most trivial
character in the manifests of bills of lading. In some cases fines amounting
to thousands of dollars have been levied upon cargoes or the carrying vessels
when the goods in question were entitled to free entry. Fines have been
exacted even when the error had been detected and the Spanish authorities
notified before the arrival of the goods in port.

This conduct is in strange contrast with the considerate and liberal treatment
extended to Spanish vessels and cargoes in our ports in like cases. No
satisfactory settlement of these vexatious questions has yet been reached.

The Mora case, referred to in my last annual message, remains unsettled. From
the diplomatic correspondence on this subject which has been laid before the
Senate it will be seen that this Government has offered to conclude a
convention with Spain for disposal by arbitration of outstanding claims
between the two countries, except the Mora claim. which, having been long ago
adjusted, now only awaits payment as stipulated, and of course it could not be
included in the proposed convention. It was hoped that this offer would remove
parliamentary obstacles encountered by the Spanish Government in providing
payment of the Mora indemnity. I regret to say that no definite reply to this
offer has yet been made and all efforts to secure payment of this settled
claim have been unavailing.

In my last annual message I adverted to the claim on the part of Turkey of the
right to expel as persons undesirable and dangerous Armenians naturalized in
the United States and returning to Turkish jurisdiction. Numerous questions in
this relation have arisen. While this Government acquiesces in the asserted
right of expulsion, it will not consent that Armenians may be imprisoned or
otherwise punished for no other reason than having acquired without imperial
consent American citizenship.

Three of the assailants of Miss Melton, an American teacher in Mosul, have
been convicted by the Ottoman courts, and I am advised that an appeal against
the acquittal of the remaining five has been taken by the Turkish prosecuting
officer.

A convention has been concluded with Venezuela for the arbitration of a
long-disputed claim growing out of the seizure of certain vessels the property
of citizens of the United States. Although signed, the treaty of extradition
with Venezuela is not yet in force, owing to the insistence of that Government
that when surrendered its citizens shall in no case be liable to capital
punishment.

The rules for the prevention of collisions at sea which were framed by the
maritime conference held in this city in 1889, having been concurrently
incorporated in the statutes of the United States and Great Britain have been
announced to take effect March 1, 1895, and invitations have been extended to
all maritime nations to adhere to them. Favorable responses have thus far been
received from Austria, France, Portugal, Spain, and Sweden.

In my last annual message I referred briefly to the unsatisfactory state of
affairs in Samoa under the operation of the Berlin treaty as signally
illustrating the impolicy of entangling alliances with foreign powers, and on
May 9, 1894, in response to a resolution of the Senate, I sent a Special
message and documents to that body on the same subject, which emphasized my
previously expressed opinions. Later occurrences, the correspondence in regard
to which will be laid before the Congress, further demonstrate that the
Government which was devised by the three powers and forced upon the Samoans
against their inveterate hostility can be maintained only by the continued
presence of foreign military force and at no small sacrifice of life and
treasure.

The suppression of the Mataafa insurrection by the powers and the subsequent
banishment of the leader and eleven other chiefs, as recited in my last
message, did not bring lasting peace to the islands. Formidable uprisings
continued, and finally a rebellion broke out in the capital island, Upolu,
headed in Aana, the western district, by the younger Tamasese, and in Atua,
the eastern district, by other leaders. The insurgents ravaged the country and
fought the Government's troops up to the very doors of Apia. The King again
appealed to the powers for help, and the combined British and German naval
forces reduced the Atuans to apparent subjection, not, however, without
considerable loss to the natives. A few days later Tamasese and his adherents,
fearing the ships and the marines, professed submission.

Reports received from our agents at Apia do not justify the belief that the
peace thus brought about will be of long duration. It is their conviction that
the natives are at heart hostile to the present Government, that such of them
as profess loyalty to it do so from fear of the powers, and that it would
speedily go to pieces if the war ships were withdrawn. In reporting to his
Government on the unsatisfactory situation since the suppression of the late
revolt by foreign armed forces, the German consul at Apia stated:

That peace will be lasting is hardly to be presumed. The lesson given by
firing on Atua was not sufficiently sharp and incisive to leave a lasting
impression on the forgetful Samoan temperament. In fact, conditions are
existing which show that peace will not last and is not seriously intended.
Malietoa, the King, and his chiefs are convinced that the departure of the war
ships will be a signal for a renewal of war. The circumstance that the
representatives of the villages of all the districts which were opposed to the
Government have already withdrawn to Atua to hold meetings, and that both Atua
and Aana have forbidden inhabitants of those districts which fought on the
side of the Government to return to their villages, and have already partly
burned down the latter, indicates that a real conciliation of the parties is
still far off.

And in a note of the 10th ultimo, inclosing a copy of that report for the
information of this Government, the German ambassador said:

The contents of the report awakened the imperial Government's apprehension
that under existing circumstances the peace concluded with the rebels will
afford no assurance of the lasting restoration of tranquillity in the islands.

The present Government has utterly failed to correct, if indeed it has not
aggravated, the very evils it was intended to prevent. It has not stimulated
our commerce with the islands. Our participation in its establishment against
the wishes of the natives was in plain defiance of the conservative teachings
and warnings of the wise and patriotic men who laid the foundations of our
free institutions, and I invite an expression of the judgment of Congress on
the propriety of steps being taken by this Government looking to the
withdrawal from its engagements with the other powers on some reasonable terms
not prejudicial to any of our existing rights.

The Secretary of the Treasury reports that the receipts of the Government from
all sources of revenue during the fiscal year ending June 30, 1894, amounted
to $372,802,498.29 and its expenditures to $442,605,758.87, leaving a deficit
of $69,803,260.58. There was a decrease of $15,952,674.66 in the ordinary
expense of the Government as compared with the fiscal year 1893.

There was collected from customs $131,818,530.62 and from internal revenue
$147,168,449.70. The balance of the income for the year, amounting to
$93,815,517.97, was derived from the sales of lands and other sources.

The value of our total dutiable imports amounted to $275,199,086, being
$146,657,625 less than during the preceding year, and the importations free of
duty amounted to $379,795,536, being $64,748,675 less than during the
preceding year. The receipts from customs were $73,536,486.11 less and from
internal revenue $13,836,539.97 less than in 1893.

The total tax collected from distilled spirits was $85,259,250.25, on
manufactured tobacco $28,617,898.62, and on fermented liquors $31,414,788.04.

Our exports of merchandise, domestic and foreign, amounted during the year to
$892,140,572, being an increase over the preceding year of $44,495,378.

The total amount of gold exported during the fiscal year was $76,898,061, as
against $108,680,444 during the fiscal year 1893. The amount imported was
$72,449,119, as against $21,174,381 during the previous year.

The imports of silver were $13,186,552 and the exports were $50,451,265.

The total bounty paid upon the production of sugar in the United States for
the fiscal year was $12,100,208.89, being an increase of $2,725,078.01 over
the payments made during the preceding year. The amount of bounty paid from
July 1, 1894, to August 28, 1894, the time when further payments ceased by
operation of law, was $966,185.84. The total expenses incurred in the payment
of the bounty upon sugar during the fiscal year was $130,140.85.

It is estimated that upon the basis of the present revenue laws the receipts
of the Government during the current fiscal year, ending June 30, 1895, will
be $424,427,748.44 and its expenditures $444,427,748.44, resulting in a
deficit of $20,000,000.

On the 1st day of November, 1894, the total stock of money of all kinds in the
country was $2,240,773,88.8, as against $2,204,651,000 on the 1st day of
November, 1893, and the money of all kinds in circulation, or not included in
the Treasury holdings, was $1,672,093,422, or $24.27 per capita upon an
estimated population of 68,887,000. At the same date there was held in the
Treasury gold bullion amounting to $44,615,177.55 and silver bullion which was
purchased at a cost of $127,772,988. The purchase of silver bullion under the
act of July 14, 1890, ceased on the 1st day of November, 1893, and up to that
time there had been purchased during the fiscal year 11,917,658.78 fine
ounces, at a cost of $8,715,521.32, an average cost of $0.7313 per fine ounce.
The total amount of silver purchased from the time that law took effect until
the repeal of its purchasing clause, on the date last mentioned, was
168,674,682.53 fine ounces, which cost $155,931,002.25, the average price per
fine ounce being $0.9244.

The total amount of standard silver dollars coined at the mints of the United
States since the passage of the act of February 28, 1878, is $421,776,408, of
which $378,166,793 were coined under the provisions of that act, $38,531,143
under the provisions of the act of July 14, 1890, and $5,078,472 under the act
providing for the coinage of trade-dollar bullion.

The total coinage of all metals at our mints during the last fiscal year
consisted of 63,485,220 pieces, valued at $106,216,730.06, of which there were
$99,474,912.50 in gold coined, $758 in standard silver dollars, $6,024,140.30
in subsidiary silver coin, and $716,919.26 in minor coin.

During the calendar year 1893 the production of precious metals in the United
States was estimated at 1,739,323 fine ounces of gold of the commercial and
coinage value of $35,955,000 and 70,000,000 fine ounces of silver of the
bullion or market value of $46,800,000 and of the coinage value of
$77,576,000. It is estimated that on the 1st day of July, 1894, the stock of
metallic money in the United States, consisting of coin and bullion, amounted
to $1,251,640,958, of which $627,923,201 was gold and $624,347,757 was silver.

Fifty national banks were organized during the year ending October 31, 1894,
with a capital of $5,285,000, and 79, with a capital of $10,475,000, went into
voluntary liquidation. Twenty-one banks, with a capital of $2,770,000, were
placed in the hands of receivers. The total number of national banks in
existence on the 31st day of October last was 3,756, being 40 less than on the
31st day of October, 1893. The capital stock paid in was $672,671,365, being
$9,678,491 less than at the same time in the previous year, and the surplus
fund and individual profits, less expenses and taxes paid, amounted to
$334,121,082.10, which was $16,089,780 less than on October 31, 1893. The
circulation was decreased $1,741,563. The obligations of the banks to each
other were increased $117,268,334 and the individual deposits were
$277,294,489 less than at the corresponding date in the previous year. Loans
and discounts were $161,206,923 more than at the same time the previous year,
and checks and other cash items were $90,349,963 more. The total resources of
the banks at the date mentioned amounted to $3,473,922,055, as against
$3,109,563,184.36 in 1893.

From the report of the Secretary of War it appears that the strength of the
Army on September 30, 1894, was 2,135 officers and 25,765 enlisted men.
Although this is apparently a very slight decrease compared with the previous
year, the actual effective force has been increased to the equivalent of
nearly two regiments through the reorganization of the system of recruiting
and the consequent release to regimental duty of the large force of men
hitherto serving at the recruiting depots. The abolition of these depots, it
is predicted, will furthermore effect an annual reduction approximating
$250,000 in the direct expenditures, besides promoting generally the health,
morale, and discipline of the troops.

The execution of the policy of concentrating the Army at important centers of
population and transportation, foreshadowed in the last annual report of the
Secretary, has resulted in the abandonment of fifteen of the smaller posts,
which was effected under a plan which assembles organizations of the same
regiments hitherto widely separated. This renders our small forces more
readily effective for any service which they may be called upon to perform,
increases the extent of the territory under protection without diminishing the
security heretofore afforded to any locality, improves the discipline,
training, and esprit de corps of the Army, besides considerably decreasing the
cost of its maintenance.

Though the forces of the Department of the East have been somewhat increased,
more than three-fourths of the Army is still stationed west of the
Mississippi. This carefully matured policy, which secures the best and
greatest service in the interests of the general welfare from the small force
comprising our Regular Army, should not be thoughtlessly embarrassed by the
creation of new and unnecessary posts through acts of Congress to gratify the
ambitions or interests of localities.

While the maximum legal strength of the Army is 25,000 men, the effective
strength, through various causes, is but little over 20,000 men. The purpose
of Congress does not, therefore, seem to be fully attained by the existing
condition. While no considerable increase in the Army is, in my judgment,
demanded by recent events, the policy of seacoast fortification, in the
prosecution of which we have been steadily engaged for some years, has so far
developed as to suggest that the effective strength of the Army be now made at
least equal to the legal strength. Measures taken by the Department during the
year, as indicated, have already considerably augmented the effective force,
and the Secretary of War presents a plan, which I recommend to the
consideration of Congress, to attain the desired end. Economies effected in
the Department in other lines of its work will offset to a great extent the
expenditure involved in the proposition submitted. Among other things this
contemplates the adoption of the three-battalion formation of regiments, which
for several years has been indorsed by the Secretaries of War and the Generals
Commanding the Army. Compact in itself, it provides a skeleton organization,
ready to be filled out in the event of war, which is peculiarly adapted to our
strength and requirements; and the fact that every other nation, with a single
exception, has adopted this formation to meet the conditions of modern warfare
should alone secure for the recommendation an early consideration.

It is hardly necessary to recall the fact that in obedience to the commands of
the Constitution and the laws, and for the purpose of protecting the property
of the United States, aiding the process of Federal courts, and removing
lawless obstructions to the performance by the Government of its legitimate
functions, it became necessary in various localities during the year to employ
a considerable portion of the regular troops. The duty was discharged
promptly, courageously, and with marked discretion by the officers and men,
and the most gratifying proof was thus afforded that the Army deserves that
complete confidence in its efficiency and discipline which the country has at
all times manifested.

The year has been free from disturbances by Indians, and the chances of
further depredations on their part are constantly becoming more remote and
improbable.

The total .expenditures for the War Department for the year ended June 30,
1894, amounted to $56,039,009.34. Of this sum $2,000,614.99 was for salaries
and contingent expenses, $23,665,156.16 for the support of the military
establishment, $5,001,682.23 for miscellaneous objects, and $25,371,555.96 for
public works. This latter sum includes $19,494,037.49 for river and harbor
improvements and $3,947,863.56 for fortifications and other works of defense.
The appropriations for the current year aggregate $52,429,112.78, and the
estimates submitted by the Secretary of War for the next fiscal year call for
appropriations amounting to $52,318,629.55.

The skill and industry of our ordnance officers and inventors have, it is
believed, overcome the mechanical obstacles which have heretofore delayed the
armament of our coasts, and this great national undertaking upon which we have
entered may now proceed as rapidly as Congress shall determine. With a supply
of finished guns of large caliber already on hand, to which additions should
now rapidly follow, the wisdom of providing carriages and emplacements for
their mount can not be too strongly urged.

The total enrollment of the militia of the several States is 117,533 officers
and enlisted men, an increase of 5,343 over the number reported at the close
of the previous year. The reports of militia inspections by Regular Army
officers show a marked increase in interest and efficiency among the State
organizations, and I strongly recommend a continuance of the policy of
affording every practical encouragement possible to this important auxiliary
of our military establishment.

The condition of the Apache Indians held as prisoners by the Government for
eight years at a cost of half a million dollars has been changed during the
year from captivity to one which gives them an opportunity to demonstrate
their capacity for self-support and at least partial civilization. Legislation
enacted at the late session of Congress gave the War Department authority to
transfer the survivors, numbering 346, from Mount Vernon Barracks, in Alabama,
to any suitable reservation. The Department selected as their future home the
military lands near Fort Sill, Ind. T., where, under military surveillance,
the former prisoners have been established in agriculture under conditions
favorable to their advancement.

In recognition of the long and distinguished military services and faithful
discharge of delicate and responsible civil duties by Major-General John M.
Schofield, now the General Commanding the Army, it is suggested to Congress
that the temporary revival of the grade of lieutenant-general in his behalf
would be a just and gracious act and would permit his retirement, now near at
hand, with rank befitting his merits.

The report of the Attorney-General notes the gratifying progress made by the
Supreme Court in overcoming the arrears of its business and in reaching a
condition in which it will be able to dispose of cases as they arise without
any unreasonable delay. This result is of course very largely due to the
successful working of the plan inaugurating circuit courts of appeals. In
respect to these tribunals the suggestion is made, in quarters entitled to the
highest consideration that an additional circuit judge for each circuit would
greatly strengthen these courts and the confidence reposed in their
adjudications, and that such an addition would not create a greater force of
judges than the increasing business of such courts requires. I commend the
suggestion to the careful consideration of the Congress. Other important
topics are adverted to in the report, accompanied by recommendations, many of
which have been treated at large in previous messages, and at this time,
therefore, need only be named. I refer to the abolition of the fee system as a
measure of compensation to Federal officers; the enlargement of the powers of
United States commissioners, at least in the Territories; the allowance of
writs of error in criminal cases on behalf of the United States, and the
establishment of degrees in the crime of murder. A topic dealt with by the
Attorney-General of much importance is the condition of the administration of
justice in the Indian Territory. The permanent solution of what is called the
Indian problem is probably not to be expected at once, but meanwhile such
ameliorations of present conditions as the existing system will admit of ought
not to be neglected. I am satisfied there should be a Federal court
established for the Territory, with sufficient judges, and that this court
should sit within the Territory and have the same jurisdiction as to
Territorial affairs as is now vested in the Federal courts sitting in Arkansas
and Texas.

Another subject of pressing moment referred to by the Attorney-General is the
reorganization of the Union Pacific Railway Company on a basis equitable as
regards all private interests and as favorable to the Government as existing
conditions will permit. The operation of a railroad by a court through a
receiver is an anomalous state of things which should be terminated on all
grounds, public and private, at the earliest possible moment. Besides, not to
enact the needed enabling legislation at the present session postpones the
whole matter until the assembling of a new Congress and inevitably increases
all the complications of the situation, and could not but be regarded as a
signal failure to solve a problem which has practically been before the
present Congress ever since its organization.

Eight years ago in my annual message I urged upon the Congress as strongly as
I could the location and construction of two prisons for the confinement of
United States prisoners. A similar recommendation has been made from time to
time since, and a few years ago a law was passed providing for the selection
of sites for three such institutions. No appropriation has, however, been made
to carry the act into effect, and the old and discreditable condition still
exists.

It is not my purpose at this time to repeat the considerations which make an
impregnable case in favor of the ownership and management by the Government of
the penal institutions in which Federal prisoners are confined. I simply
desire to again urge former recommendations on the subject and to particularly
call the attention of the Congress to that part of the report of the Secretary
of War in which he states that the military prison at Fort Leavenworth, Kans.,
can be turned over to the Government as a prison for Federal convicts without
the least difficulty and with an actual saving of money from every point of
view.

Pending a more complete reform, I hope that by the adoption of the suggestion
of the Secretary of War this easy step may be taken in the direction of the
proper care of its convicts by the Government of the United States.

The report of the Postmaster-General presents a comprehensive statement of the
operations of the Post-Office Department for the last fiscal year.

The receipts of the Department during the year amounted to $75,080,479.04 and
the expenditures to $84,324,414.15.

The transactions of the postal service indicate with barometric certainty the
fluctuations in the business of the country. Inasmuch, therefore, as business
complications continued to exist throughout the last year to an unforeseen
extent, it is not surprising that the deficiency of revenue to meet the
expenditures of the Post-Office Department, which was estimated in advance at
about $8,000,000, should be exceeded by nearly $1,225,000. The ascertained
revenues of the last year, which were the basis of calculation for the current
year, being less than estimated, the deficiency for the current year will be
correspondingly greater, though the Postmaster-General states that the latest
indications are so favorable that he confidently predicts an increase of at
least 8 per cent in the revenues of the current year over those of the last
year.

The expenditures increase steadily and necessarily with the growth and needs
of the country, so that the deficiency is greater or less in any year,
depending upon the volume of receipts.

The Postmaster-General states that this deficiency is unnecessary and might be
obviated at once if the law regulating rates upon mail matter of the second
class was modified. The rate received for the transmission of this
second-class matter is 1 cent per pound, while the cost of such transmission
to the Government is eight times that amount. In the general terms of the law
this rate covers newspapers and periodicals. The extensions of the meaning of
these terms from time to time have admitted to the privileges intended for
legitimate newspapers and periodicals a surprising range of publications and
created abuses the cost of which amounts in the aggregate to the total
deficiency of the Post-Office Department. Pretended newspapers are started by
business houses for the mere purpose of advertising goods, complying with the
law in form only and discontinuing the publications as soon as the period of
advertising is over. "Sample copies" of pretended newspapers are issued in
great numbers for a like purpose only. The result is a great loss of revenue
to the Government, besides its humiliating use as an agency to aid in carrying
out the scheme of a business house to advertise its goods by means of a trick
upon both its rival houses and the regular and legitimate newspapers.
Paper-covered literature, consisting mainly of trashy novels, to the extent of
many thousands of tons is sent through the mails at 1 cent per pound, while
the publishers of standard works are required to pay eight times that amount
in sending their publications. Another abuse consists in the free carriage
through the mails of hundreds of tons of seed and grain uselessly distributed
through the Department of Agriculture. The Postmaster-General predicts that if
the law be so amended as to eradicate these abuses not only will the
Post-Office Department show no deficiency, but he believes that in the near
future all legitimate newspapers and periodical magazines might be properly
transmitted through the mails to their subscribers free of cost. I invite your
prompt consideration of this subject and fully indorse the views of the
Postmaster-General.

The total number of post-offices in the United States on the 30th day of June,
1894, was 69,805, an increase of 1,403 over the preceding year. Of these,
3,428 were Presidential, an increase in that class of 68 over the preceding
year.

Six hundred and ten cities and towns are provided with free delivery.
Ninety-three other cities and towns entitled to this service under the law
have not been accorded it on account of insufficient funds. The expense of
free delivery for the current fiscal year will be more than $12,300,000, and
under existing legislation this item of expenditure is subject to constant
increase. The estimated cost of rural free delivery generally is so very large
that it ought not to be considered in the present condition of affairs.

During the year 830 additional domestic money-order offices were established.
The total number of these offices at the close of the year was 19,264. There
were 14,304,041 money orders issued during the year, being an increase over
the preceding year of 994,306. The value of these orders amounted to
$138,793,579.49, an increase of $11,217,145.84. There were also issued during
the year postal notes amounting to $12,649,094.55.

During the year 218 international money-order offices were added to those
already established, making a total of 2,625 such offices in operation June
30, 1894. The number of international money orders issued during the year was
917,823, a decrease in number of 138,176, and their value was $13,792,455.31,
a decrease in amount of $2,549,382.55. The number of orders paid was 361,180,
an increase over the preceding year of 60,263, and their value was
$6,568,493.78, an increase of $1,285,118.08.

From the foregoing statements it appears that the total issue of money orders
and postal notes for the year amounted to $165,235,129.35.

The number of letters and packages mailed during the year for special delivery
was 3,436,970. The special-delivery stamps used upon these letters and
packages amounted to $343,697. The messengers fees paid for their delivery
amounted to $261,209.70, leaving a balance in favor of the Government of
$82,487.30.

The report shows most gratifying results in the way of economies worked out
without affecting the efficiency of the postal service. These consist in the
abrogation of steamship subsidy contracts, reletting of mail transportation
contracts, and in the cost and amount of supplies used in the service,
amounting in all to $16,619,047.42.

This report also contains a valuable contribution to the history of the
Universal Postal Union, an arrangement which amounts practically to the
establishment of one postal system for the entire civilized world. Special
attention is directed to this subject at this time in view of the fact that
the next congress of the union will meet in Washington in 1897, and it is
hoped that timely action will be taken in the direction of perfecting
preparations for that event.

The Postmaster-General renews the suggestion made in a previous report that
the Department organization be increased to the extent of creating a direct
district supervision of all postal affairs, and in this suggestion I fully
concur.

There are now connected with the Post-Office establishment 32,661 employees
who are in the classified service. This includes many who have been classified
upon the suggestion of the Postmaster-General. He states that another year's
experience at the head of the Department serves only to strengthen the
conviction as to the excellent working of the civil-service law in this branch
of the public service.

Attention is called to the report of the Secretary of the Navy, which shows
very gratifying progress in the construction of ships for our new Navy. All
the vessels now building, including the three torpedo boats authorized at the
last session of Congress and excepting the first-class battle ship Iowa, will
probably be completed during the coming fiscal year.

The estimates for the increase of the Navy for the year ending June 30, 1896,
are large, but they include practically the entire sum necessary to complete
and equip all the new ships not now in commission, so that unless new ships
are authorized the appropriations for the naval service for the fiscal year
ending June 30, 1897, should fall below the estimates for the coming year by
at least $12,000,000.

The Secretary presents with much earnestness a plea for the authorization of
three additional battle ships and ten or twelve torpedo boats. While the
unarmored vessels heretofore authorized, including those now nearing
completion, will constitute a fleet which it is believed is sufficient for
ordinary cruising purposes in time of peace, we have now completed and in
process of construction but four first-class battle ships and but few torpedo
boats. If we are to have a navy for warlike operations, offensive and
defensive, we certainly ought to increase both the number of battle ships and
torpedo boats.

The manufacture of armor requires expensive plants and the aggregation of many
skilled workmen. All the armor necessary to complete the vessels now building
will be delivered before the 1st of June next. If no new contracts are given
out, contractors must disband their workmen and their plants must lie idle.
Battle ships authorized at this time would not be well under way until late in
the coming fiscal year, and at least three years and a half from the date of
the contract would be required for their completion. The Secretary states that
not more than 15 per cent of the cost of such ships need be included in the
appropriations for the coming year.

I recommend that provision be made for the construction of additional battle
ships and torpedo boats. The Secretary recommends the manufacture not only of
a reserve supply of ordnance and ordnance material for ships of the Navy, but
also a supply for the auxiliary fleet. Guns and their appurtenances should be
provided and kept on hand for both these purposes. We have not to-day a single
gun that could be put upon the ships Paris or New York of the International
Navigation Company or any other ship of our reserve Navy.

The manufacture of guns at the Washington Navy-Yard is proceeding
satisfactorily, and none of our new ships will be required to wait for their
guns or ordnance equipment.

An important order has been issued by the Secretary of the Navy coordinating
the duties of the several bureaus concerned in the construction of ships. This
order, it is believed, will secure to a greater extent than has heretofore
been possible the harmonious action of these several bureaus and make the
attainment of the best results more certain.

During the past fiscal year there has been an unusual and pressing demand in
many quarters of the world for the presence of vessels to guard American
interests.

In January last, during the Brazilian insurrection, a large fleet was
concentrated in the harbor of Rio de Janeiro. The vigorous action of
Rear-Admiral Benham in protecting the personal and commercial rights of our
citizens during the disturbed conditions afforded results which will, it is
believed, have a far-reaching and wholesome influence whenever in like
circumstances it may become necessary for our naval commanders to interfere on
behalf of our people in foreign ports.

The war now in progress between China and Japan has rendered it necessary or
expedient to dispatch eight vessels to those waters.

Both the Secretary of the Navy and the Secretary of the Treasury recommend the
transfer of the work of the Coast Survey proper to the Navy Department. I
heartily concur in this recommendation. Excluding Alaska and a very small area
besides, all the work of mapping and charting our coasts has been completed.
The hydrographic work, which must be done over and over again by reason of the
shifting and varying depths of water consequent upon the action of streams and
tides, has heretofore been done under the direction of naval officers in
subordination to the Superintendent of the Coast Survey. There seems to be no
good reason why the Navy should not have entire charge hereafter of such work,
especially as the Hydrographic Office of the Navy Department is now and has
been for many years engaged in making efficient maps entirely similar to those
prepared by the Coast Survey.

I feel it my imperative duty to call attention to the recommendation of the
Secretary in regard to the personnel of the line of the Navy. The stagnation
of promotion in this the vital branch of the service is so great as to
seriously impair its efficiency.

I consider it of the utmost importance that the young and middle-aged officers
should before the eve of retirement be permitted to reach a grade entitling
them to active and important duty.

The system adopted a few years ago regulating the employment of labor at the
navy-yards is rigidly upheld and has fully demonstrated its usefulness and
expediency. It is within the domain of civil-service reform inasmuch as
workmen are employed through a board of labor selected at each navy-yard and
are given work without reference to politics and in the order of their
application, preference, however, being given to Army and Navy veterans and
those having former navy-yard experience.

Amendments suggested by experience have been made to the rules regulating the
system. Through its operation the work at our navy-yards has been vastly
improved in efficiency and the opportunity to work has been honestly and
fairly awarded to willing and competent applicants.

It is hoped that if this system continues to be strictly adhered to there will
soon be as a natural consequence such an equalization of party benefit as will
remove all temptation to relax or abandon it.

The report of the Secretary of the Interior exhibits the situation of the
numerous and interesting branches of the public service connected with his
Department. I commend this report and the valuable recommendations of the
Secretary to the careful attention of the Congress.

The public land disposed of during the year amounted to 10,406,100.77 acres,
including 28,876.05 of Indian lands.

It is estimated that the public domain still remaining amounts to a little
more than 600,000,000 acres, including, however, about 360,000,000 acres in
Alaska, as well as military reservations and railroad and other selections of
lands yet unadjudicated.

The total cash receipts from sale of lands amounted to $2,674,285.79,
including $91,981.03 received for Indian lands.

Thirty-five thousand patents were issued for agricultural lands, and 3,100
patents were issued to Indians on allotments of their holdings in severalty,
the land so allotted being inalienable by the Indian allottees for a period of
twenty-five years after patent.

There were certified and patented on account of railroad and wagon-road grants
during the year 865,556.45 acres of land, and at the close of the year
29,000,000 acres were embraced in the lists of selections made by railroad and
wagon-road companies and awaited settlement.

The selections of swamp lands and that taken as indemnity therefor since the
passage of the act providing for the same in 1849 amount to nearly or quite
80,500,000 acres, of which 58,000,000 have been patented to States. About
138,000 acres were patented during the last year. Nearly 820,000 acres of
school and education grants were approved during the year, and at its close
1,250,363.81 acres remained unadjusted.

It appears that the appropriation for the current year on account of special
service for the protection of the public lands and the timber thereon is much
less than those for previous years, and inadequate for an efficient
performance of the work. A larger sum of money than has been appropriated
during a number of years past on this account has been returned to the
Government as a result of the labors of those employed in the particular
service mentioned, and I hope it will not be crippled by insufficient
appropriation.

I fully indorse the recommendation of the Secretary that adequate protection
be provided for our forest reserves and that a comprehensive forestry system
be inaugurated. Such keepers and superintendents as are necessary to protect
the forests already reserved should be provided.

I am of the opinion that there should be an abandonment of the policy
sanctioned by present laws under which the Government, for a very small
consideration, is rapidly losing title to immense tracts of land covered with
timber, which should be properly reserved as permanent sources of timber
supply.

The suggestion that a change be made in the manner of securing surveys of the
public lands is especially worthy of consideration. I am satisfied that these
surveys should be made by a corps of competent surveyors under the immediate
control and direction of the Commissioner of the General Land Office.

An exceedingly important recommendation of the Secretary relates to the manner
in which contests and litigated cases growing out of efforts to obtain
Government land are determined. The entire testimony upon which these
controversies depend in all their stages is taken before the local registers
and receivers, and yet these officers have no power to subpoena witnesses or
to enforce their attendance to testify. These cases, numbering three or four
thousand annually, are sent by the local officers to the Commissioner of the
General Land Office for his action. The exigencies of his other duties oblige
him to act upon the decisions of the registers and receivers without an
opportunity of thorough personal examination. Nearly 2,000 of these cases are
appealed annually from the Commissioner to the Secretary of the Interior.
Burdened with other important administrative duties, his determination of
these appeals must be almost perfunctory and based upon the examination of
others, though this determination of the Secretary operates as a final
adjudication upon rights of very great importance.

I concur in the opinion that the Commissioner of the General Land Office
should be relieved from the duty of deciding litigated land cases, that a
nonpartisan court should be created to pass on such cases, and that the
decisions of this court should be final, at least so far as the decisions of
the Department are now final. The proposed court might be given authority to
certify questions of law in matters of especial importance to the Supreme
Court of the United States or the court of appeals for the District of
Columbia for decision. The creation of such a tribunal would expedite the
disposal of cases and insure decisions of a more satisfactory character. The
registers and receivers who originally hear and decide these disputes should
be invested with authority to compel witnesses to attend and testify before
them.

Though the condition of the Indians shows a steady and healthy progress, their
situation is not satisfactory at all points. Some of them to whom allotments
of land have been made are found to be unable or disinclined to follow
agricultural pursuits or to otherwise beneficially manage their land. This is
especially true of the Cheyennes and Arapahoes, who, as it appears by reports
of their agent, have in many instances never been located upon their
allotments, and in some cases do not even know where their allotments are.
Their condition has deteriorated. They are not self-supporting and they live
in camps and spend their time in idleness.

I have always believed that allotments of reservation lands to Indians in
severalty should be made sparingly, or at least slowly, and with the utmost
caution. In these days, when white agriculturists and stock raisers of
experience and intelligence find their lot a hard one, we ought not to expect
Indians, unless far advanced in civilization and habits of industry, to
support themselves on the small tracts of land usually allotted to them.

If the self-supporting scheme by allotment fails, the wretched pauperism of
the allottees which results is worse than their original condition of
regulated dependence. It is evident that the evil consequences of ill-advised
allotment are intensified in cases where the false step can not be retraced on
account of the purchase by the Government of reservation lands remaining after
allotments are made and the disposition of such remaining lands to settlers or
purchasers from the Government.

I am convinced that the proper solution of the Indian problem and the success
of every step taken in that direction depend to a very large extent upon the
intelligence and honesty of the reservation agents and the interest they have
in their work. An agent fitted for his place can do much toward preparing the
Indians under his charge for citizenship and allotment of their lands, and his
advice as to any matter concerning their welfare will not mislead. An unfit
agent will make no effort to advance the Indians on his reservation toward
civilization or preparation for allotment of lands in severalty, and his
opinion as to their condition in this and other regards is heedless and
valueless.

The indications are that the detail of army officers as Indian agents will
result in improved management on the reservations.

Whenever allotments are made and any Indian on the reservation has previously
settled upon a lot and cultivated it or shown a disposition to improve it in
any way, such lot should certainly be allotted to him, and this should be made
plainly obligatory by statute.

In the light of experience and considering the uncertainty of the Indian
situation and its exigencies in the future, I am not only disposed to be very
cautious in making allotments, but I incline to agree with the Secretary of
the Interior in the opinion that when allotments are made the balance of
reservation land remaining after allotment, instead of being bought by the
Government from the Indians and opened for settlement with such scandals and
unfair practices as seem unavoidable, should remain for a time at least as
common land or be sold by the Government on behalf of the Indians in an
orderly way and at fixed prices, to be determined by its location and
desirability, and that the proceeds, less expenses, should be held in trust
for the benefit of the Indian proprietors.

The intelligent Indian-school management of the past year has been followed by
gratifying results. Efforts have been made to advance the work in a sound and
practical manner. Five institutes of Indian teachers have been held during the
year, and have proved very beneficial through the views exchanged and methods
discussed particularly applicable to Indian education.

Efforts are being made in the direction of a gradual reduction of the number
of Indian contract schools, so that in a comparatively short time they may
give way altogether to Government schools, and it is hoped that the change may
be so gradual as to be perfected without too great expense to the Government
or undue disregard of investments made by those who have established and are
maintaining such contract schools.

The appropriation for the current year, ending June 30, 1895, applicable to
the ordinary expenses of the Indian service amounts to $6,733,003.18, being
less by $663,240.64 than the sum appropriated on the same account for the
previous year.

At the close of the last fiscal year, on the 30th day of June, 1894, there
were 969,544 persons on our pension rolls, being a net increase of 3,532 over
the number reported at the end of the previous year.

These pensioners may be classified as follows: Soldiers and sailors survivors
of all wars, 753,968; widows and relatives of deceased soldiers, 215,162; army
nurses in the War of the Rebellion, 414. Of these pensioners 32,039 are
surviving soldiers of Indian and other wars prior to the late Civil War and
the widows or relatives of such soldiers.

The remainder, numbering 937,505, are receiving pensions on account of the
rebellion, and of these 469,344 are on the rolls under the authority of the
act of June 27, 1890, sometimes called the dependent-pension law.

The total amount expended for pensions during the year was $139,804,461.05,
leaving an unexpended balance from the sum appropriated of $25,205,712.65.

The sum necessary to meet pension expenditures for the year ending June 30,
1896, is estimated at $140,000,000.

The Commissioner of Pensions is of the opinion that the year 1895, being the
thirtieth after the close of the War of the Rebellion, must, according to all
sensible human calculation, see the highest limit of the pension roll, and
that after that year it must begin to decline.

The claims pending in the Bureau have decreased more than 90,000 during the
year. A large proportion of the new claims filed are for increase of pension
by those now on the rolls.

The number of certificates issued was 80,213.

The names dropped from the rolls for all causes during the year numbered
37,951.

Among our pensioners are 9 widows and 3 daughters of soldiers of the
Revolution and 45 survivors of the War of 1812.

The barefaced and extensive pension frauds exposed under the direction of the
courageous and generous veteran soldier now at the head of the Bureau leave no
room for the claim that no purgation of our pension rolls was needed or that
continued vigilance and prompt action are not necessary to the same end.

The accusation that an effort to detect pension frauds is evidence of
unfriendliness toward our worthy veterans and a denial of their claims to the
generosity of the Government suggests an unfortunate indifference to the
commission of any offense which has for its motive the securing of a pension
and indicates a willingness to be blind to the existence of mean and
treacherous crimes which play upon demagogic fears and make sport of the
patriotic impulse of a grateful people.

The completion of the Eleventh Census is now in charge of the Commissioner of
Labor. The total disbursements on account of the work for the fiscal year
ending June 30, 1894, amounted to $10,365,676.81. At the close of the year the
number of persons employed in the Census Office was 679; at present there are
about 400. The whole number of volumes necessary to comprehend the Eleventh
Census will be 25, and they will contain 22,270 printed pages. The assurance
is confidently made that before the close of the present calendar year the
material still incomplete will be practically in hand, and the census can
certainly be closed by the 4th of March, 1895. After that the revision and
proof reading necessary to bring out the volumes will still be required.

The text of the census volumes has been limited as far as possible to the
analysis of the statistics presented. This method, which is in accordance with
law, has caused more or less friction and in some instances individual
disappointment, for when the Commissioner of Labor took charge of the work he
found much matter on hand which according to this rule he was compelled to
discard. The census is being prepared according to the theory that it is
designed to collect facts and certify them to the public, not to elaborate
arguments or to present personal views.

The Secretary of Agriculture in his report reviews the operations of his
Department for the last fiscal year and makes recommendations for the further
extension of its usefulness. He reports a saving in expenditures during the
year of $600,000, which is covered back into the Treasury. This sum is 23 per
cent of the entire appropriation.

A special study has been made of the demand for American farm products in all
foreign markets, especially Great Britain, That country received from the
United States during the nine months ending September 30, 1894, 305,910 live
beef cattle, valued at $26,500,000, as against 182,611 cattle, valued at
$16,634,000, during the same period for 1893.

During the first six months of 1894 the United Kingdom took also 112,000,000
pounds of dressed beef from the United States, valued at nearly $10,000,000.

The report shows that during the nine months immediately preceding September
30, 1894, the United States exported to Great Britain 222,676,000 pounds of
pork; of apples, 1,900,000 bushels, valued at $2,500,000, and of horses 2,811,
at an average value of $139 per head. There was a falling off in American
wheat exports of 13,500,000 bushels, and the Secretary is inclined to believe
that wheat may not in the future be the staple export cereal product of our
country, but that corn will continue to advance in importance as an export on
account of the new uses to which it is constantly being appropriated.

The exports of agricultural products from the United States for the fiscal
year ending June 30, 1894, amounted to $628,363,038, being 72.28 per cent of
American exports of every description, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain
took more than 54 per cent of all farm products finding foreign markets.

The Department of Agriculture has undertaken during the year two new and
important lines of research. The first relates to grasses and forage plants,
with the purpose of instructing and familiarizing the people as to the
distinctive grasses of the United States and teaching them how to introduce
valuable foreign forage plants which may be adapted to this country. The
second relates to agricultural soils and crop production, involving the
analyses of samples of soils from all sections of the American Union, to
demonstrate their adaptability to particular plants and crops. Mechanical
analyses of soils may be of such inestimable utility that it is foremost in
the new lines of agricultural research, and the Secretary therefore recommends
that a division having it in charge be permanently established in the
Department.

The amount appropriated for the Weather Bureau was $951,100. Of that sum
$138,500, or 14 per cent, has been saved and is returned to the Treasury.

As illustrating the usefulness of this service it may be here stated that the
warnings which were very generally given of two tropical storms occurring in
September and October of the present year resulted in detaining safely in port
2,305 vessels, valued at $36,183,913, laden with cargoes of probably still
greater value. What is much more important and gratifying, many human lives on
these ships were also undoubtedly saved.

The appropriation to the Bureau of Animal Industry was $850,000, and the
expenditures for the year were only $495,429.24, thus leaving unexpended
$354,570.76. The inspection of beef animals for export and interstate trade
has been continued, and 12,944,056 head were inspected during the year, at a
cost of 1 3/4 cents per head, against 4 3/4 cents for 1893. The amount of pork
microscopically examined was 35,437,937 pounds, against 20,677,410 pounds in
the preceding year. The cost of this inspection has been diminished from 8 3/4
cents per head in 1893 to 6 1/2 cents in 1894.

The expense of inspecting the pork sold in 1894 to Germany and France by the
United States was $88,922.10. The quantity inspected was greater by 15,000,000
pounds than during the preceding year, when the cost of such inspection was
$172,367.08. The Secretary of Agriculture recommends that the law providing
for the microscopic inspection of export and interstate meat be so amended as
to compel owners of the meat inspected to pay the cost of such inspection, and
I call attention to the arguments presented in his report in support of this
recommendation.

The live beef cattle exported and tagged during the year numbered 353,535.
This is an increase of 69,533 head over the previous year.

The sanitary inspection of cattle shipped to Europe has cost an average of 10
3/4 cents for each animal, and the cost of inspecting Southern cattle and the
disinfection of cars and stock yards averages 2.7 cents per animal.

The scientific inquiries of the Bureau of Animal Industry have progressed
steadily during the year. Much tuberculin and mallein have been furnished to
State authorities for use in the agricultural colleges and experiment stations
for the treatment of tuberculosis and glanders.

Quite recently this Department has published the results of its investigations
of bovine tuberculosis, and its researches will be vigorously continued.
Certain herds in the District of Columbia will be thoroughly inspected and
will probably supply adequate scope for the Department to intelligently
prosecute its scientific work and furnish sufficient material for purposes of
illustration, description, and definition.

The sterilization of milk suspected of containing the bacilli of tuberculosis
has been during the year very thoroughly explained in a leaflet by Dr. D. E.
Salmon, the Chief of the Bureau, and given general circulation throughout the
country.

The Office of Experiment Stations, which is a part of the United States
Department of Agriculture, has during the past year engaged itself almost
wholly in preparing for publication works based upon the reports of
agricultural experiment stations and other institutions for agricultural
inquiry in the United States and foreign countries.

The Secretary in his report for 1893 called attention to the fact that the
appropriations made for the support of the experiment stations throughout the
Union were the only moneys taken out of the National Treasury by act of
Congress for which no accounting to Federal authorities was required.
Responding to this suggestion, the Fifty-third Congress, in making the
appropriation for the Department for the present fiscal year, provided that--

The Secretary of Agriculture shall prescribe the form of annual financial
statement required by section 3 of said act of March 2, 1887; shall ascertain
whether the expenditures under the appropriation hereby made are in accordance
with the provisions of said act, and shall make report thereon to Congress.

In obedience to this law the Department of Agriculture immediately sent out
blank forms of expense accounts to each station, and proposes in addition to
make, through trusted experts, systematic examination of the several stations
during each year for the purpose of acquiring by personal investigation the
detailed information necessary to enable the Secretary of Agriculture to make,
as the statute provides, a satisfactory report to Congress. The boards of
management of the several stations with great alacrity and cordiality have
approved the amendment to the law providing this supervision of their
expenditures, anticipating that it will increase the efficiency of the
stations and protect their directors and managers from loose charges
concerning their use of public funds, besides bringing the Department of
Agriculture into closer and more confidential relations with the experimental
stations, and through their joint service largely increasing their usefulness
to the agriculture of the country.

Acting upon a recommendation contained in the report of 1893, Congress
appropriated $10,000 "to enable the Secretary of Agriculture to investigate
and report upon the nutritive value of the various articles and commodities
used for human food, with special suggestions of full, wholesome, and edible
rations less wasteful and more economical than those in common use."

Under this appropriation the Department has prepared and now has nearly ready
for distribution an elementary discussion of the nutritive value and pecuniary
economy of food. When we consider that fully one-half of all the money earned
by the wage earners of the civilized world is expended by them for food, the
importance and utility of such an investigation is apparent.

The Department expended in the fiscal year 1893 $2,354,809.56, and out of that
sum the total amount expended in scientific research was 45.6 per cent. But in
the year ending June 30, 1894, out of a total expenditure of $1,948,988.38,
the Department applied 51.8 per cent of that sum to scientific work and
investigation. It is therefore very plainly observable that the economies
which have been practiced in the administration of the Department have not
been at the expense of scientific research.

The recommendation contained in the report of the Secretary for 1893 that the
vicious system of promiscuous free distribution of its departmental documents
be abandoned is again urged. These publications may well be furnished without
cost to public libraries, educational institutions, and the officers and
libraries of States and of the Federal Government; but from all individuals
applying for them a price covering the cost of the document asked for should
be required. Thus the publications and documents would be secured by those who
really desire them for proper purposes. Half a million of copies of the report
of the Secretary of Agriculture are printed for distribution, at an annual
cost of about $300,000. Large numbers of them are cumbering storerooms at the
Capitol and the shelves of secondhand-book stores throughout the country. All
this labor and waste might be avoided if the recommendations of the Secretary
were adopted.

The Secretary also again recommends that the gratuitous distribution of seeds
cease and that no money be appropriated for that purpose except to experiment
stations. He reiterates the reasons given in his report for 1893 for
discontinuing this unjustifiable gratuity, and I fully concur in the
conclusions which he has reached.

The best service of the statistician of the Department of Agriculture is the
ascertainment, by diligence and care, of the actual and real conditions,
favorable or unfavorable, of the farmers and farms of the country, and to seek
the causes which produce these conditions, to the end that the facts
ascertained may guide their intelligent treatment.

A further important utility in agricultural statistics is found in their
elucidation of the relation of the supply of farm products to the demand for
them in the markets of the United States and of the world.

It is deemed possible that an agricultural census may be taken each year
through the agents of the statistical division of the Department. Such a
course is commended for trial by the chief of that division. Its scope would
be: (1) The area under each of the more important crops. (2) The aggregate
products of each of such crops. (3) The quantity of wheat and corn in the
hands of farmers at a date after the spring sowings and plantings and before
the beginning of harvest, and also the quantity of cotton and tobacco
remaining in the hands of planters, either at the same date or at some other
designated time.

The cost of the work is estimated at $500,000.

Owing to the peculiar quality of the statistician's work and the natural and
acquired fitness necessary to its successful prosecution, the Secretary of
Agriculture expresses the opinion that every person employed in gathering
statistics under the chief of that division should be admitted to that service
only after a thorough, exhaustive, and successful examination at the hands of
the United States Civil Service Commission. This has led him to call for such
examination of candidates for the position of assistant statisticians, and
also of candidates for chiefs of sections in that division.

The work done by the Department of Agriculture is very superficially dealt
with in this communication, and I commend the report of the Secretary and the
very important interests with which it deals to the careful attention of the
Congress.

The advantages to the public service of an adherence to the principles of
civil-service reform are constantly more apparent, and nothing is so
encouraging to those in official life who honestly desire good government as
the increasing appreciation by our people of these advantages. A vast majority
of the voters of the land are ready to insist that the time and attention of
those they select to perform for them important public duties should not be
distracted by doling out minor offices, and they are growing to be unanimous
in regarding party organization as something that should be used in
establishing party principles instead of dictating the distribution of public
places as rewards of partisan activity.

Numerous additional offices and places have lately been brought within
civil-service rules and regulations, and some others will probably soon be
included.

The report of the Commissioners will be submitted to the Congress, and I
invite careful attention to the recommendations it contains.

I am entirely convinced that we ought not to be longer without a national
board of health or national health officer charged with no other duties than
such as pertain to the protection of our country from the invasion of
pestilence and disease. This would involve the establishment by such board or
officer of proper quarantine precautions, or the necessary aid and counsel to
local authorities on the subject; prompt advice and assistance to local boards
of health or health officers in the suppression of contagious disease, and in
cases where there are no such local boards or officers the immediate direction
by the national board or officer of measures of suppression; constant and
authentic information concerning the health of foreign countries and all parts
of our own country as related to contagious diseases, and consideration of
regulations to be enforced in foreign ports to prevent the introduction of
contagion into our cities and the measures which should be adopted to secure
their enforcement.

There seems to be at this time a decided inclination to discuss measures of
protection against contagious diseases in international conference, with a
view of adopting means of mutual assistance. The creation of such a national
health establishment would greatly aid our standing in such conferences and
improve our opportunities to avail ourselves of their benefits.

I earnestly recommend the inauguration of a national board of health or
similar national instrumentality, believing the same to be a needed precaution
against contagious disease and in the interest of the safety and health of our
people.

By virtue of a statute of the United States passed in 1888 I appointed in July
last Hon. John D. Kernan, of the State of New York, and Hon. Nicholas E.
Worthington, of the State of Illinois, to form, with Hon. Carroll D. Wright,
Commissioner of Labor, who was designated by said statute, a commission for
the purpose of making careful inquiry into the causes of the controversies
between certain railroads and their employees which had resulted in an
extensive and destructive strike, accompanied by much violence and dangerous
disturbance, with considerable loss of life and great destruction of property.

The report of the commissioners has been submitted to me and will be
transmitted to the Congress with the evidence taken upon their investigation.

Their work has been well done, and their standing and intelligence give
assurance that the report and suggestions they make are worthy of careful
consideration.

The tariff act passed at the last session of the Congress needs important
amendments if it is to be executed effectively and with certainty. In addition
to such necessary amendments as will not change rates of duty, I am still very
decidedly in favor of putting coal and iron upon the free list.

So far as the sugar schedule is concerned, I would be glad, under existing
aggravations, to see every particle of differential duty in favor of refined
sugar stricken out of our tariff law. If with all the favor now accorded the
sugar-refining interest in our tariff laws it still languishes to the extent
of closed refineries and thousands of discharged workmen, it would seem to
present a hopeless case for reasonable legislative aid. Whatever else is done
or omitted, I earnestly repeat here the recommendation I have made in another
portion of this communication, that the additional duty of one-tenth of a cent
per pound laid upon sugar imported from countries paying a bounty on its
export be abrogated. It seems to me that exceedingly important considerations
point to the propriety of this amendment.

With the advent of a new tariff policy not only calculated to relieve the
consumers of our land in the cost of their daily life, but to invite a better
development of American thrift and create for us closer and more profitable
commercial relations with the rest of the world, it follows as a logical and
imperative necessity that we should at once remove the chief if not the only
obstacle which has so long prevented our participation in the foreign carrying
trade of the sea. A tariff built upon the theory that it is well to check
imports and that a home market should bound the industry and effort of
American producers was fitly supplemented by a refusal to allow American
registry to vessels built abroad, though owned and navigated by our people,
thus exhibiting a willingness to abandon all contest for the advantages of
American transoceanic carriage. Our new tariff policy, built upon the theory
that it is well to encourage such importations as our people need, and that
our products and manufactures should find markets in every part of the
habitable globe, is consistently supplemented by the greatest possible liberty
to our citizens in the ownership and navigation of ships in which our products
and manufactures may be transported. The millions now paid to foreigners for
carrying American passengers and products across the sea should be turned into
American hands. Shipbuilding, which has been protected to strangulation,
should be revived by the prospect of profitable employment for ships when
built, and the American sailor should be resurrected and again take his
place--a sturdy and industrious citizen in time of peace and a patriotic and
safe defender of American interests in the day of conflict.

The ancient provision of our law denying American registry to ships built
abroad and owned by Americans appears in the light of present conditions not
only to be a failure for good at every point, but to be nearer a relic of
barbarism than anything that exists under the permission of a statute of the
United States. I earnestly recommend its prompt repeal.

During the last month the gold reserved in the Treasury for the purpose of
redeeming the notes of the Government circulating as money in the hands of the
people became so reduced and its further depletion in the near future seemed
so certain that in the exercise of proper care for the public welfare it
became necessary to replenish this reserve and thus maintain popular faith in
the ability and determination of the Government to meet as agreed its
pecuniary obligations.

It would have been well if in this emergency authority had existed to issue
the bonds of the Government bearing a low rate of interest and maturing within
a short period; but the Congress having failed to confer such authority,
resort was necessarily had to the resumption act of 1875, and pursuant to its
provisions bonds were issued drawing interest at the rate of 5 per cent per
annum and maturing ten years after their issue, that being the shortest time
authorized by the act. I am glad to say, however, that on the sale of these
bonds the premium received operated to reduce the rate of interest to be paid
by the Government to less than 3 per cent.

Nothing could be worse or further removed from sensible finance than the
relations existing between the currency the Government has issued, the gold
held for its redemption, and the means which must be resorted to for the
purpose of replenishing such redemption fund when impaired. Even if the claims
upon this fund were confined to the obligations originally intended and if the
redemption of these obligations meant their cancellation, the fund would be
very small. But these obligations when received and redeemed in gold are not
canceled, but are reissued and may do duty many times by way of drawing gold
from the Treasury. Thus we have an endless chain in operation constantly
depleting the Treasury's gold and never near a final rest. As if this was not
bad enough, we have, by a statutory declaration that it is the policy of the
Government to maintain the parity between gold and silver, aided the force and
momentum of this exhausting process and added largely to the currency
obligations claiming this peculiar gold redemption. Our small gold reserve is
thus subject to drain from every side. The demands that increase our danger
also increase the necessity of protecting this reserve against depletion, and
it is most unsatisfactory to know that the protection afforded is only a
temporary palliation.

It is perfectly and palpably plain that the only way under present conditions
by which this reserve when dangerously depleted can be replenished is through
the issue and sale of the bonds of the Government for gold, and yet Congress
has not only thus far declined to authorize the issue of bonds best suited to
such a purpose, but there seems a disposition in some quarters to deny both
the necessity and power for the issue of bonds at all.

I can not for a moment believe that any of our citizens are deliberately
willing that their Government should default in its pecuniary obligations or
that its financial operations should be reduced to a silver basis. At any
rate, I should not feel that my duty was done if I omitted any effort I could
make to avert such a calamity. As long, therefore, as no provision is made for
the final redemption or the putting aside of the currency obligation now used
to repeatedly and constantly draw from the Government its gold, and as long as
no better authority for bond issues is allowed than at present exists, such
authority will be utilized whenever and as often as it becomes necessary to
maintain a sufficient gold reserve, and in abundant time to save the credit of
our country and make good the financial declarations of our Government.

Questions relating to our banks and currency are closely connected with the
subject just referred to, and they also present some unsatisfactory features.
Prominent among them are the lack of elasticity in our currency circulation
and its frequent concentration in financial centers when it is most needed in
other parts of the country.

The absolute divorcement of the Government from the business of banking is the
ideal relationship of the Government to the circulation of the currency of the
country.

This condition can not be immediately reached, but as a step in that direction
and as a means of securing a more elastic currency and obviating other
objections to the present arrangement of bank circulation the Secretary of the
Treasury presents in his report a scheme modifying present banking laws and
providing for the issue of circulating notes by State banks free from taxation
under certain limitations.

The Secretary explains his plan so plainly and its advantages are developed by
him with such remarkable clearness that any effort on my part to present
argument in its support would be superfluous. I shall therefore content myself
with an unqualified indorsement of the Secretary's proposed changes in the law
and a brief and imperfect statement of their prominent features. It is
proposed to repeal all laws providing for the deposit of United States bonds
as security for circulation; to permit national banks to issue circulating
notes not exceeding in amount 75 per cent of their paid-up and unimpaired
capital, provided they deposit with the Government as a guaranty fund, in
United States legal-tender notes, including Treasury notes of 1890, a sum
equal in amount to 30 per cent of the notes they desire to issue, this deposit
to be maintained at all times, but whenever any bank retires any part of its
circulation a proportional part of its guaranty fund shall be returned to it;
to permit the Secretary of the Treasury to prepare and keep on hand ready for
issue in case an increase in circulation is desired blank national-bank notes
for each bank having circulation and to repeal the provisions of the present
law imposing limitations and restrictions upon banks desiring to reduce or
increase their circulation, thus permitting such increase or reduction within
the limit of 75 per cent of capital to be quickly made as emergencies arise.

In addition to the guaranty fund required, it is proposed to provide a safety
fund for the immediate redemption of the circulating notes of failed banks by
imposing a small annual tax, say one-half of 1 per cent, upon the average
circulation of each bank until the fund amounts to 5 per cent of the total
circulation outstanding. When a bank fails its guaranty fund is to be paid
into this safety fund and its notes are to be redeemed in the first instance
from such safety fund thus augmented, any impairment of such fund caused
thereby to be made good from the immediately available cash assets of said
bank, and if these should be insufficient such impairment to be made good by
pro rata assessment among the other banks, their contributions constituting a
first lien upon the assets of the failed bank in favor of the contributing
banks. As a further security it is contemplated that the existing provision
fixing the individual liability of stockholders is to be retained and the
bank's indebtedness on account of its circulating notes is to be made a first
lien on all its assets.

For the purpose of meeting the expense of printing notes, official
supervision, cancellation, and other like charges there shall be imposed a tax
of say one-half of 1 per cent per annum upon the average amount of notes in
circulation.

It is further provided that there shall be no national-bank notes issued of a
less denomination than $10; that each national bank, except in case of a
failed bank, shall redeem or retire its notes in the first instance at its own
office or at agencies to be designated by it, and that no fixed reserve need
be maintained on account of deposits.

Another very important feature of this plan is the exemption of State banks
from taxation by the United States in cases where it is shown to the
satisfaction of the Secretary of the Treasury and Comptroller of the Currency
by banks claiming such exemption that they have not had outstanding their
circulating notes exceeding 75 per cent of their paid-up and unimpaired
capital; that their stockholders are individually liable for the redemption of
their circulating notes to the full extent of their ownership of stock; that
the liability of said banks upon their circulating notes constitutes under
their State law a first lien upon their assets; that such banks have kept and
maintained a guaranty fund in United States legal-tender notes, including
Treasury notes of 1890, equal to 30 per cent of their outstanding circulating
notes, and that such banks have promptly redeemed their circulating notes when
presented at their principal or branch offices.

It is quite likely that this scheme may be usefully amended in some of its
details, but I am satisfied it furnishes a basis for a very great improvement
in our present banking and currency system.

I conclude this communication fully appreciating that the responsibility for
all legislation affecting the people of the United States rests upon their
representatives in the Congress, and assuring them that, whether in accordance
with recommendations I have made or not, I shall be glad to cooperate in
perfecting any legislation that tends to the prosperity and welfare of our
country.

GROVER CLEVELAND

1895:
To the Congress of the United States:

The present assemblage of the legislative branch of our Government occurs at a
time when the interests of our people and the needs of the country give
especial prominence to the condition of our foreign relations and the
exigencies of our national finances. The reports of the heads of the several
administrative Departments of the Government fully and plainly exhibit what
has been accomplished within the scope of their respective duties and present
such recommendations for the betterment of our country's condition as
patriotic and intelligent labor and observation suggest.

I therefore deem my executive duty adequately performed at this time by
presenting to the Congress the important phases of our situation as related to
our intercourse with foreign nations and a statement of the financial problems
which confront us, omitting, except as they are related to these topics, any
reference to departmental operations.

I earnestly invite, however, not only the careful consideration but the
severely critical scrutiny of the Congress and my fellow-countrymen to the
reports concerning these departmental operations. If justly and fairly
examined, they will furnish proof of assiduous and painstaking care for the
public welfare. I press the recommendations they contain upon the respectful
attention of those charged with the duty of legislation, because I believe
their adoption would promote the people's good.

By amendatory tariff legislation in January last the Argentine Republic,
recognizing the value of the large market opened to the free importation of
its wools under our last tariff act, has admitted certain products of the
United States to entry at reduced duties. It is pleasing to note that the
efforts we have made to enlarge the exchanges of trade on a sound basis of
mutual benefit are in this instance appreciated by the country from which our
woolen factories draw their needful supply of raw material.

The Missions boundary dispute between the Argentine Republic and Brazil,
referred to the President of the United States as arbitrator during the term
of my predecessor, and which was submitted to me for determination, resulted
in an award in favor of Brazil upon the historical and documentary evidence
presented, thus ending a long-protracted controversy and again demonstrating
the wisdom and desirability of settling international boundary disputes by
recourse to friendly arbitration.

Negotiations are progressing for a revival of the United States and Chilean
Claims Commission, whose work was abruptly terminated last year by the
expiration of the stipulated time within which awards could be made.

The resumption of specie payments by Chile is a step of great interest and
importance both in its direct consequences upon her own welfare and as
evincing the ascendency of sound financial principles in one of the most
influential of the South American Republics.

The close of the momentous struggle between China and Japan, while relieving
the diplomatic agents of this Government from the delicate duty they undertook
at the request of both countries of rendering such service to the subjects of
either belligerent within the territorial limits of the other as our neutral
position permitted, developed a domestic condition in the Chinese Empire which
has caused much anxiety and called for prompt and careful attention. Either as
a result of a weak control by the central Government over the provincial
administrations, following a diminution of traditional governmental authority
under the stress of an overwhelming national disaster, or as a manifestation
upon good opportunity of the aversion of the Chinese population to all foreign
ways and undertakings, there have occurred in widely separated provinces of
China serious outbreaks of the old fanatical spirit against foreigners, which,
unchecked by the local authorities, if not actually connived at by them, have
culminated in mob attacks on foreign missionary stations, causing much
destruction of property and attended with personal injuries as well as loss of
life.

Although but one American citizen was reported to have been actually wounded,
and although the destruction of property may have fallen more heavily upon the
missionaries of other nationalities than our own, it plainly behooved this
Government to take the most prompt and decided action to guard against similar
or perhaps more dreadful calamities befalling the hundreds of American mission
stations which have grown up throughout the interior of China under the
temperate rule of toleration, custom, and imperial edict. The demands of the
United States and other powers for the degradation and punishment of the
responsible officials of the respective cities and provinces who by neglect or
otherwise had permitted uprisings, and for the adoption of stern measures by
the Emperor's Government for the protection of the life and property of
foreigners, were followed by the disgrace and dismissal of certain provincial
officials found derelict in duty and the punishment by death of a number of
those adjudged guilty of actual participation in the outrages.

This Government also insisted that a special American commission should visit
the province where the first disturbances occurred for the purpose of
investigation. The latter commission, formed after much opposition, has gone
overland from Tientsin, accompanied by a suitable Chinese escort, and by its
demonstration of the readiness and ability of our Government to protect its
citizens will act, it is believed, as a most influential deterrent of any
similar outbreaks.

The energetic steps we have thus taken are all the more likely to result in
future safety to our citizens in China because the Imperial Government is, I
am persuaded, entirely convinced that we desire only the liberty and
protection of our own citizens and redress for any wrongs they may have
suffered, and that we have no ulterior designs or objects, political or
otherwise. China will not forget either our kindly service to her citizens
during her late war nor the further fact that, while furnishing all the
facilities at our command to further the negotiation of a peace between her
and Japan, we sought no advantages and interposed no counsel.

The Governments of both China and Japan have, in special dispatches
transmitted through their respective diplomatic representatives, expressed in
a most pleasing manner their grateful appreciation of our assistance to their
citizens during the unhappy struggle and of the value of our aid in paving the
way to their resumption of peaceful relations.

The customary cordial relations between this country and France have been
undisturbed, with the exception that a full explanation of the treatment of
John L. Waller by the expeditionary military authorities of France still
remains to be given. Mr. Waller, formerly United States consul at Tamatav,
remained in Madagascar after his term of office expired, and was apparently
successful in procuring business concessions from the Hovas of greater or less
value. After the occupation of Tamatav and the declaration of martial law by
the French he was arrested upon various charges, among them that of
communicating military information to the enemies of France, was tried and
convicted by a military tribunal, and sentenced to twenty years' imprisonment.

Following the course justified by abundant precedents, this Government
requested from that of France the record of the proceedings of the French
tribunal which resulted in Mr. Waller's condemnation. This request has been
complied with to the extent of supplying a copy of the official record, from
which appear the constitution and organization of the court, the charges as
formulated, and the general course and result of the trial, and by which it is
shown that the accused was tried in open court and was defended by counsel;
but the evidence adduced in support of the charges, which was not received by
the French minister for foreign affairs till the first week in October, has
thus far been withheld, the French Government taking the ground that its
production in response to our demand would establish a bad precedent. The
efforts of our ambassador to procure it, however, though impeded by recent
changes in the French ministry, have not been relaxed, and it is confidently
expected that some satisfactory solution of the matter will shortly be
reached. Meanwhile it appears that Mr. Waller's confinement has every
alleviation which the state of his health and all the other circumstances of
the case demand or permit.

In agreeable contrast to the difference above noted respecting a matter of
common concern, where nothing is sought except such a mutually satisfactory
outcome as the true merits of the case require, is the recent resolution of
the French Chambers favoring the conclusion of a permanent treaty of
arbitration between the two countries.

An invitation has been extended by France to the Government and people of the
United States to participate in a great international exposition at Paris in
1900 as a suitable commemoration of the close of this the world's marvelous
century of progress. I heartily recommend its acceptance, together with such
legislation as will adequately provide for a due representation of this
Government and its people on the occasion.

Our relations with the States of the German Empire are in some aspects typical
of a condition of things elsewhere found in countries whose productions and
trade are similar to our own. The close rivalries of competing industries; the
influence of the delusive doctrine that the internal development of a nation
is promoted and its wealth increased by a policy which, in undertaking to
reserve its home markets for the exclusive use of its own producers,
necessarily obstructs their sales in foreign markets and prevents free access
to the products of the world; the desire to retain trade in time-worn ruts,
regardless of the inexorable laws of new needs and changed conditions of
demand and supply, and our own halting tardiness in inviting a freer exchange
of commodities, and by this means imperiling our footing in the external
markets naturally open to us, have created a situation somewhat injurious to
American export interests, not only in Germany, where they are perhaps most
noticeable, but in adjacent countries. The exports affected are largely
American cattle and other food products, the reason assigned for unfavorable
discrimination being that their consumption is deleterious to the public
health. This is all the more irritating in view of the fact that no European
state is as jealous of the excellence and wholesomeness of its exported food
supplies as the United States, nor so easily able, on account of inherent
soundness, to guarantee those qualities.

Nor are these difficulties confined to our food products designed for
exportation. Our great insurance companies, for example, having built up a
vast business abroad and invested a large share of their gains in foreign
countries in compliance with the local laws and regulations then existing, now
find themselves within a narrowing circle of onerous and unforeseen
conditions, and are confronted by the necessity of retirement from a field
thus made unprofitable, if, indeed, they are not summarily expelled, as some
of them have lately been from Prussia.

It is not to be forgotten that international trade can not be one-sided. Its
currents are alternating, and its movements should be honestly reciprocal.
Without this it almost necessarily degenerates into a device to gain advantage
or a contrivance to secure benefits with only the semblance of a return. In
our dealings with other nations we ought to be open-handed and scrupulously
fair. This should be our policy as a producing nation, and it plainly becomes
us as a people who love generosity and the moral aspects of national good
faith and reciprocal forbearance.

These considerations should not, however, constrain us to submit to unfair
discrimination nor to silently acquiesce in vexatious hindrances to the
enjoyment of our share of the legitimate advantages of proper trade relations.
If an examination of the situation suggests such measures on our part as would
involve restrictions similar to those from which we suffer, the way to such a
course is easy. It should, however, by no means be lightly entered upon, since
the necessity for the inauguration of such a policy would be regretted by the
best sentiment of our people and because it naturally and logically might lead
to consequences of the gravest character.

I take pleasure in calling to your attention the encomiums bestowed on those
vessels of our new Navy which took part in the notable ceremony of the opening
of the Kiel Canal. It was fitting that this extraordinary achievement of the
newer German nationality should be celebrated in the presence of America's
exposition of the latest developments of the world' s naval energy.

Our relations with Great Britain, always intimate and important, have demanded
during the past year even a greater share of consideration than is usual.

Several vexatious questions were left undetermined by the decision of the
Bering Sea Arbitration Tribunal. The application of the principles laid down
by that august body has not been followed by the results they were intended to
accomplish, either because the principles themselves lacked in breadth and
definiteness or because their execution has been more or less imperfect. Much
correspondence has been exchanged between the two Governments on the subject
of preventing the exterminating slaughter of seals. The insufficiency of the
British patrol of Bering Sea under the regulations agreed on by the two
Governments has been pointed out, and yet only two British ships have been on
police duty during this season in those waters.

The need of a more effective enforcement of existing regulations as well as
the adoption of such additional regulations as experience has shown to be
absolutely necessary to carry out the intent of the award have been earnestly
urged upon the British Government, but thus far without effective results. In
the meantime the depletion of the seal herds by means of pelagic hunting has
so alarmingly progressed that unless their slaughter is at once effectively
checked their extinction within a few years seems to be a matter of absolute
certainty.

The understanding by which the United States was to pay and Great Britain to
receive a lump sum of $425,000 in full settlement of all British claims for
damages arising from our seizure of British sealing vessels unauthorized under
the award of the Paris Tribunal of Arbitration was not confirmed by the last
Congress, which declined to make the necessary appropriation. I am still of
the opinion that this arrangement was a judicious and advantageous one for the
Government, and I earnestly recommend that it be again considered and
sanctioned. If, however, this does not meet with the favor of Congress, it
certainly will hardly dissent from the proposition that the Government is
bound by every consideration of honor and good faith to provide for the speedy
adjustment of these claims by arbitration as the only other alternative. A
treaty of arbitration has therefore been agreed upon, and will be immediately
laid before the Senate, so that in one of the modes suggested a final
settlement may be reached.

Notwithstanding that Great Britain originated the proposal to enforce
international rules for the prevention of collisions at sea, based on the
recommendations of the Maritime Conference of Washington, and concurred in,
suggesting March 11, 1895, as the date to be set by proclamation for carrying
these rules into general effect, Her Majesty's Government, having encountered
opposition on the part of British shipping interests, announced its inability
to accept that date, which was consequently canceled. The entire matter is
still in abeyance, without prospect of a better condition in the near future.

The commissioners appointed to mark the international boundary in
Passamaquoddy Bay according to the description of the treaty of Ghent have not
yet fully agreed.

The completion of the preliminary survey of that Alaskan boundary which
follows the contour of the coast from the southernmost point of Prince of
Wales Island until it strikes the one hundred and forty-first meridian at or
near the summit of Mount St. Elias awaits further necessary appropriation,
which is urgently recommended. This survey was undertaken under the provisions
of the convention entered into by this country and Great Britain July 22,
1892, and the supplementary convention of February 3, 1894.

As to the remaining section of the Alaskan boundary, which follows the one
hundred and forty-first meridian northwardly from Mount St. Elias to the
Frozen Ocean, the settlement of which involves the physical location of the
meridian mentioned, no conventional agreement has yet been made. The
ascertainment of a given meridian at a particular point is a work requiring
much time and careful observations and surveys. Such observations and surveys
were undertaken by the United States Coast and Geodetic Survey in 1890 and
1891, while similar work in the same quarters, under British auspices, is
believed to give nearly coincident results; but these surveys have been
independently conducted, and no international agreement to mark those or any
other parts of the one hundred and forty-first meridian by permanent monuments
has yet been made. In the meantime the valley of the Yukon is becoming a
highway through the hitherto unexplored wilds of Alaska, and abundant mineral
wealth has been discovered in that region, especially at or near the junction
of the boundary meridian with the Yukon and its tributaries. In these
circumstances it is expedient, and, indeed, imperative, that the
jurisdictional limits of the respective Governments in this new region be
speedily determined. Her Britannic Majesty's Government has proposed a joint
delimitation of the one hundred and forty-first meridian by an international
commission of experts, which, if Congress will authorize it and make due
provision therefor, can be accomplished with no unreasonable delay. It is
impossible to overlook the vital importance of continuing the work already
entered upon and supplementing it by further effective measures looking to the
exact location of this entire boundary line.

I call attention to the unsatisfactory delimitation of the respective
jurisdictions of the United States and the Dominion of Canada in the Great
Lakes at the approaches to the narrow waters that connect them. The waters in
question are frequented by fishermen of both nationalities and their nets are
there used. Owing to the uncertainty and ignorance as to the true boundary,
vexations disputes and injurious seizures of boats and nets by Canadian
cruisers often occur, while any positive settlement thereof by an accepted
standard is not easily to be reached. A joint commission to determine the line
in those quarters on a practical basis, by measured courses following range
marks on shore, is a necessity for which immediate provision should be made.

It being apparent that the boundary dispute between Great Britain and the
Republic of Venezuela concerning the limits of British Guiana was approaching
an acute stage, a definite statement of the interest and policy of the United
States as regards the controversy seemed to be required both on its own
account and in view of its relations with the friendly powers directly
concerned. In July last, therefore, a dispatch was addressed to our ambassador
at London for communication to the British Government in which the attitude of
the United States was fully and distinctly set forth. The general conclusions
therein reached and formulated are in substance that the traditional and
established policy of this Government is firmly opposed to a forcible increase
by any European power of its territorial possessions on this continent; that
this policy is as well rounded in principle as it is strongly supported by
numerous precedents; that as a consequence the United States is bound to
protest against the enlargement of the area of British Guiana in derogation of
the rights and against the will of Venezuela; that considering the disparity
in strength of Great Britain and Venezuela the territorial dispute between
them can be reasonably settled only by friendly and impartial arbitration, and
that the resort to such arbitration should include the whole controversy, and
is not satisfied if one of the powers concerned is permitted to draw an
arbitrary line through the territory in debate and to declare that it will
submit to arbitration only the portion lying on one side of it. In view of
these conclusions, the dispatch in question called upon the British Government
for a definite answer to the question whether it would or would not submit the
territorial controversy between itself and Venezuela in its entirety to
impartial arbitration. The answer of the British Government has not yet been
received, but is expected shortly, when further communication on the subject
will probably be made to the Congress.

Early in January last an uprising against the Government of Hawaii was
promptly suppressed. Martial law was forthwith proclaimed and numerous arrests
were made of persons suspected of being in sympathy with the Royalist party.
Among these were several citizens of the United States, who were either
convicted by a military court and sentenced to death, imprisonment, or fine or
were deported without trial. The United States, while denying protection to
such as had taken the Hawaiian oath of allegiance, insisted that martial law,
though altering the forms of justice, could not supersede justice itself, and
demanded stay of execution until the proceedings had been submitted to this
Government and knowledge obtained therefrom that our citizens had received
fair trial. The death sentences were subsequently commuted or were remitted on
condition of leaving the islands. The cases of certain Americans arrested and
expelled by arbitrary order without formal charge or trial have had attention,
and in some instances have been found to justify remonstrance and a claim for
indemnity, which Hawaii has not thus far conceded.

Mr. Thurston, the Hawaiian minister, having furnished this Government abundant
reason for asking that he be recalled, that course was pursued, and his
successor has lately been received.

The deplorable lynching of several Italian laborers in Colorado was naturally
followed by international representations, and I am happy to say that the best
efforts of the State in which the outrages occurred have been put forth to
discover and punish the authors of this atrocious crime. The dependent
families of some of the unfortunate victims invite by their deplorable
condition gracious provision for their needs.

These manifestations against helpless aliens may be traced through successive
stages to the vicious padroni system, which, unchecked by our immigration and
contract-labor statutes, controls these workers from the moment of landing on
our shores and farms them out in distant and often rude regions, where their
cheapening competition in the fields of bread-winning toil brings them into
collision with other labor interests. While welcoming, as we should, those who
seek our shores to merge themselves in our body politic and win personal
competence by honest effort, we can not regard such assemblages of
distinctively alien laborers, hired out in the mass to the profit of alien
speculators and shipped hither and thither as the prospect of gain may
dictate, as otherwise than repugnant to the spirit of our civilization,
deterrent to individual advancement, and hindrances to the building up of
stable communities resting upon the wholesome ambitions of the citizen and
constituting the prime factor in the prosperity and progress of our nation. If
legislation can reach this growing evil, it certainly should be attempted.

Japan has furnished abundant evidence of her vast gain in every trait and
characteristic that constitutes a nation's greatness. We have reason for
congratulation in the fact that the Government of the United States, by the
exchange of liberal treaty stipulations with the new Japan, was the first to
recognize her wonderful advance and to extend to her the consideration and
confidence due to her national enlightenment and progressive character.

The boundary dispute which lately threatened to embroil Guatemala and Mexico
has happily yielded to pacific counsels, and its determination has, by the
joint agreement of the parties, been submitted to the sole arbitration of the
United States minister to Mexico.

The commission appointed under the convention of February 18, 1889, to set new
monuments along the boundary between the United States and Mexico has
completed its task.

As a sequel to the failure of a scheme for the colonization in Mexico of
negroes, mostly immigrants from Alabama under contract, a great number of
these helpless and suffering people, starving and smitten with contagious
disease, made their way or were assisted to the frontier, where, in wretched
plight, they were quarantined by the Texas authorities. Learning of their
destitute condition, I directed rations to be temporarily furnished them
through the War Department. At the expiration of their quarantine they were
conveyed by the railway companies at comparatively nominal rates to their
homes in Alabama, upon my assurance, in the absence of any fund available for
the cost of their transportation, that I would recommend to Congress an
appropriation for its payment. I now strongly urge upon Congress the propriety
of making such an appropriation. It should be remembered that the measures
taken were dictated not only by sympathy and humanity, but by a conviction
that it was not compatible with the dignity of this Government that so large a
body of our dependent citizens should be thrown for relief upon the charity of
a neighboring state.

In last year's message I narrated at some length the jurisdictional questions
then freshly arisen in the Mosquito Indian Strip of Nicaragua. Since that
time, by the voluntary act of the Mosquito Nation, the territory reserved to
them has been incorporated with Nicaragua, the Indians formally subjecting
themselves to be governed by the general laws and regulations of the Republic
instead of by their own customs and regulations, and thus availing themselves
of a privilege secured to them by the treaty between Nicaragua and Great
Britain of January 28, 1860.

After this extension of uniform Nicaraguan administration to the Mosquito
Strip, the case of the British vice-consul, Hatch, and of several of his
countrymen who had been summarily expelled from Nicaragua and treated with
considerable indignity provoked a claim by Great Britain upon Nicaragua for
pecuniary indemnity, which, upon Nicaragua's refusal to admit liability, was
enforced by Great Britain. While the sovereignty and jurisdiction of Nicaragua
was in no way questioned by Great Britain, the former's arbitrary conduct in
regard to British subjects furnished the ground for this proceeding.

A British naval force occupied without resistance the Pacific seaport of
Corinto, but was soon after withdrawn upon the promise that the sum demanded
would be paid. Throughout this incident the kindly offices of the United
States were invoked and were employed in favor of as peaceful a settlement and
as much consideration and indulgence toward Nicaragua as were consistent with
the nature of the case. Our efforts have since been made the subject of
appreciative and grateful recognition by Nicaragua. The coronation of the Czar
of Russia at Moscow in May next invites the ceremonial participation of the
United States, and in accordance with usage and diplomatic propriety our
minister to the imperial court has been directed to represent our Government
on the occasion.

Correspondence is on foot touching the practice of Russian consuls within the
jurisdiction of the United States to interrogate citizens as to their race and
religious faith, and upon ascertainment thereof to deny to Jews authentication
of passports or legal documents for use in Russia. Inasmuch as such a
proceeding imposes a disability which in the case of succession to property in
Russia may be found to infringe the treaty rights of our citizens, and which
is an obnoxious invasion of our territorial jurisdiction, it has elicited
fitting remonstrance, the result of which, it is hoped, will remove the cause
of complaint. The pending claims of sealing vessels of the United States
seized in Russian waters remain unadjusted. Our recent convention with Russia
establishing a modus vivendi as to imperial jurisdiction in such cases has
prevented further difficulty of this nature.

The Russian Government has welcomed in principle our suggestion for a modus
vivendi, to embrace Great Britain and Japan, looking to the better
preservation of seal life in the North Pacific and Bering Sea and the
extension of the protected area defined by the Paris Tribunal to all Pacific
waters north of the thirty-fifth parallel. It is especially noticeable that
Russia favors prohibition of the use of firearms in seal hunting throughout
the proposed area and a longer closed season for pelagic sealing.

In my last two annual messages I called the attention of the Congress to the
position we occupied as one of the parties to a treaty or agreement by which
we became jointly bound with England and Germany to so interfere with the
government and control of Samoa as in effect to assume the management of its
affairs. On the 9th day of May, 1894, I transmitted to the Senate a special
message, with accompanying documents, giving information on the subject and
emphasizing the opinion I have at all times entertained, that our situation in
this matter was inconsistent with the mission and traditions of our
Government, in violation of the principles we profess, and in all its phases
mischievous and vexatious.

I again press this subject upon the attention of the Congress and ask for such
legislative action or expression as will lead the way to our relief from
obligations both irksome and unnatural.

Cuba is again gravely disturbed. An insurrection in some respects more active
than the last preceding revolt, which continued from 1868 to 1878, now exists
in a large part of the eastern interior of the island, menacing even some
populations on the coast. Besides deranging the commercial exchanges of the
island, of which our country takes the predominant share, this flagrant
condition of hostilities, by arousing sentimental sympathy and inciting
adventurous support among our people, has entailed earnest effort on the part
of this Government to enforce obedience to our neutrality laws and to prevent
the territory of the United States from being abused as a vantage ground from
which to aid those in arms against Spanish sovereignty.

Whatever may be the traditional sympathy of our countrymen as individuals with
a people who seem to be struggling for larger autonomy and greater freedom,
deepened, as such sympathy naturally must be, in behalf of our neighbors, yet
the plain duty of their Government is to observe in good faith the recognized
obligations of international relationship. The performance of this duty should
not be made more difficult by a disregard on the part of our citizens of the
obligations growing out of their allegiance to their country, which should
restrain them from violating as individuals the neutrality which the nation of
which they are members is bound to observe in its relations to friendly
sovereign states. Though neither the warmth of our people's sympathy with the
Cuban insurgents, nor our loss and material damage consequent upon the futile
endeavors thus far made to restore peace and order, nor any shock our humane
sensibilities may have received from the cruelties which appear to especially
characterize this sanguinary and fiercely conducted war, have in the least
shaken the determination of the Government to honestly fulfill every
international obligation, yet it is to be earnestly hoped on every ground that
the devastation of armed conflict may speedily be stayed and order and quiet
restored to the distracted island, bringing in their train the activity and
thrift of peaceful pursuits.

One notable instance of interference by Spain with passing American ships has
occurred. On March 8 last the Allianca, while bound from Colon to New York,
and following the customary track for vessels near the Cuban shore, but
outside the 3-mile limit, was fired upon by a Spanish gunboat. Protest was
promptly made by the United States against this act as not being justified by
a state of war, nor permissible in respect of vessels on the usual paths of
commerce, nor tolerable in view of the wanton peril occasioned to innocent
life and property. The act was disavowed, with full expression of regret and
assurance of nonrecurrence of such just cause of complaint, while the
offending officer was relieved of his command. Military arrests of citizens of
the United States in Cuba have occasioned frequent reclamations. Where held on
criminal charges their delivery to the ordinary civil jurisdiction for trial
has been demanded and obtained in conformity with treaty provisions, and where
merely detained by way of military precaution under a proclaimed state of
siege, without formulated accusation, their release or trial has been insisted
upon. The right of American consular officers in the island to prefer protests
and demands in such cases having been questioned by the insular authority,
their enjoyment of the privilege stipulated by treaty for the consuls of
Germany was claimed under the most-favored-nation provision of our own
convention and was promptly recognized.

The long-standing demand of Antonio Maximo Mora against Spain has at last been
settled by the payment, on the 14th of September last, of the sum originally
agreed upon in liquidation of the claim. Its distribution among the parties
entitled to receive it has proceeded as rapidly as the rights of those
claiming the fund could be safely determined.

The enforcement of differential duties against products of this country
exported to Cuba and Puerto Rico prompted the immediate claim on our part to
the benefit of the minimum tariff of Spain in return for the most favorable
treatment permitted by our laws as regards the production of Spanish
territories. A commercial arrangement was concluded in January last securing
the treatment so claimed.

Vigorous protests against excessive fines imposed on our ships and merchandise
by the customs officers of these islands for trivial errors have resulted in
the remission of such fines in instances where the equity of the complaint was
apparent, though the vexatious practice has not been wholly discontinued.

Occurrences in Turkey have continued to excite concern. The reported massacres
of Christians in Armenia and the development there and in other districts of a
spirit of fanatic hostility to Christian influences naturally excited
apprehension for the safety of the devoted men and women who, as dependents of
the foreign missionary societies in the United States, reside in Turkey under
the guaranty of law and usage and in the legitimate performance of their
educational and religious mission. No efforts have been spared in their
behalf, and their protection in person and property has been earnestly and
vigorously enforced by every means within our power.

I regret, however, that an attempt on our part to obtain better information
concerning the true condition of affairs in the disturbed quarter of the
Ottoman Empire by sending thither the United States consul at Sivas to make
investigation and report was thwarted by the objections of the Turkish
Government. This movement on our part was in no sense meant as a gratuitous
entanglement of the United States in the so-called Eastern question nor as an
officious interference with the right and duty which belong by treaty to
certain great European powers calling for their intervention in political
matters affecting the good government and religious freedom of the
non-Mussulman subjects of the Sultan, but it arose solely from our desire to
have an accurate knowledge of the conditions in our efforts to care for those
entitled to our protection.

The presence of our naval vessels which are now in the vicinity of the
disturbed localities affords opportunities to acquire a measure of familiarity
with the condition of affairs and will enable us to take suitable steps for
the protection of any interests of our countrymen within reach of our ships
that might be found imperiled.

The Ottoman Government has lately issued an imperial irade exempting forever
from taxation an American college for girls at Scutari. Repeated assurances
have also been obtained by our envoy at Constantinople that similar
institutions maintained and administered by our countrymen shall be secured in
the enjoyment of all rights and that our citizens throughout the Empire shall
be protected.

The Government, however, in view of existing facts, is far from relying upon
such assurances as the limit of its duty. Our minister has been vigilant and
alert in affording all possible protection in individual cases where danger
threatened or safety was imperiled. We have sent ships as far toward the
points of actual disturbance as it is possible for them to go, where they
offer refuge to those obliged to flee, and we have the promise of other powers
which have ships in the neighborhood that our citizens as well as theirs will
be received and protected on board those ships. On the demand of our minister
orders have been issued by the Sultan that Turkish soldiers shall guard and
escort to the coast American refugees.

These orders have been carried out, and our latest intelligence gives
assurance of the present personal safety of our citizens and missionaries.
Though thus far no lives of American citizens have been sacrificed, there can
be no doubt that serious loss and destruction of mission property have
resulted from riotous conflicts and outrageous attacks.

By treaty several of the most powerful European powers have secured a right
and have assumed a duty not only in behalf of their own citizens and in
furtherance of their own interests, but as agents of the Christian world.
Their right is to enforce such conduct of Turkish government as will restrain
fanatical brutality, and if this fails their duty is to so interfere as to
insure against such dreadful occurrences in Turkey as have lately shocked
civilization. The powers declare this right and this duty to be theirs alone,
and it is earnestly hoped that prompt and effective action on their part will
not be delayed.

The new consulates at Erzerum and Harpoot, for which appropriation was made
last session, have been provisionally filled by trusted employees of the
Department of State. These appointees, though now in Turkey, have not yet
received their exequaturs.

The arbitration of the claim of the Venezuela Steam Transportation Company
under the treaty of January 19, 1892, between the United States and Venezuela,
resulted in an award in favor of the claimant.

The Government has used its good offices toward composing the differences
between Venezuela on the one hand and France and Belgium on the other growing
out of the dismissal of the representatives of those powers on the ground of a
publication deemed offensive to Venezuela. Although that dismissal was coupled
with a cordial request that other more personally agreeable envoys be sent in
their stead, a rupture of intercourse ensued and still continues.

In view of the growth of our interests in foreign countries and the
encouraging prospects for a general expansion of our commerce, the question of
an improvement in the consular service has increased in importance and
urgency. Though there is no doubt that the great body of consular officers are
rendering valuable services to the trade and industries of the country, the
need of some plan of appointment and control which would tend to secure a
higher average of efficiency can not be denied.

The importance of the subject has led the Executive to consider what steps
might properly be taken without additional legislation to answer the need of a
better system of consular appointments. The matter having been committed to
the consideration of the Secretary of State, in pursuance of his
recommendations an Executive order was issued on the 20th of September, 1895,
by the terms of which it is provided that after that date any vacancy in a
consulate or commercial agency with an annual salary or compensation from
official fees of not more than $2,500 or less than $1,000 should be filled
either by transfer or promotion from some other position under the Department
of State of a character tending to qualify the incumbent for the position to
be filled, or by the appointment of a person not under the Department of
State, but having previously served thereunder and shown his capacity and
fitness for consular duty, or by the appointment of a person who, having been
selected by the President and sent to a board for examination, is found upon
such examination to be qualified for the position. Posts which pay less than
$1,000 being usually, on account of their small compensation, filled by
selection from residents of the locality, it was not deemed practicable to put
them under the new system.

The compensation of $2,500 was adopted as the maximum limit in the
classification for the reason that consular officers receiving more than that
sum are often charged with functions and duties scarcely inferior in dignity
and importance to those of diplomatic agents, and it was therefore thought
best to continue their selection in the discretion of the Executive without
subjecting them to examination before a board. Excluding 71 places with
compensation at present less than $1,000 and 53 places above the maximum in
compensation, the number of positions remaining within the scope of the order
is 196. This number will undoubtedly be increased by the inclusion of consular
officers whose remuneration in fees, now less than $1,000, will be augmented
with the growth of our foreign commerce and a return to more favorable
business conditions.

In execution of the Executive order referred to the Secretary of State has
designated as a board to conduct the prescribed examinations the Third
Assistant Secretary of State, the Solicitor of the Department of State, and
the Chief of the Consular Bureau, and has specified the subjects to which such
examinations shall relate.

It is not assumed that this system will prove a full measure of consular
reform. It is quite probable that actual experience will show particulars in
which the order already issued may be amended and demonstrate that for the
best results appropriate legislation by Congress is imperatively required.

In any event, these efforts to improve the consular service ought to be
immediately supplemented by legislation providing for consular inspection.
This has frequently been a subject of Executive recommendation, and I again
urge such action by Congress as will permit the frequent and thorough
inspection of consulates by officers appointed for that purpose or by persons
already in the diplomatic or consular service. The expense attending such a
plan would be insignificant compared with its usefulness, and I hope the
legislation necessary to set it on foot will be speedily forthcoming.

I am thoroughly convinced that in addition to their salaries our ambassadors
and ministers at foreign courts should be provided by the Government with
official residences. The salaries of these officers are comparatively small
and in most cases insufficient to pay, with other necessary expenses, the cost
of maintaining household establishments in keeping with their important and
delicate functions. The usefulness of a nation's diplomatic representative
undeniably depends much upon the appropriateness of his surroundings, and a
country like ours, while avoiding unnecessary glitter and show, should be
certain that it does not suffer in its relations with foreign nations through
parsimony and shabbiness in its diplomatic outfit. These considerations and
the other advantages of having fixed and somewhat permanent locations for our
embassies would abundantly justify the moderate expenditure necessary to carry
out this suggestion.

As we turn from a review of our foreign relations to the contemplation of our
national financial situation we are immediately aware that we approach a
subject of domestic concern more important than any other that can engage our
attention, and one at present in such a perplexing and delicate predicament as
to require prompt and wise treatment.

We may well be encouraged to earnest effort in this direction when we recall
the steps already taken toward improving our economic and financial situation
and when we appreciate how well the way has been prepared for further progress
by an aroused and intelligent popular interest in these subjects.

By command of the people a customs-revenue system designed for the protection
and benefit of favored classes at the expense of the great mass of our
countrymen, and which, while inefficient for the purpose of revenue, curtailed
our trade relations and impeded our entrance to the markets of the world, has
been superseded by a tariff policy which in principle is based upon a denial
of the right of the Government to obstruct the avenues to our people's cheap
living or lessen their comfort and contentment for the sake of according
especial advantages to favorites, and which, while encouraging our intercourse
and trade with other nations, recognizes the fact that American self-reliance,
thrift, and ingenuity can build up our country's industries and develop its
resources more surely than enervating paternalism.

The compulsory purchase and coinage of silver by the Government, unchecked and
unregulated by business conditions and heedless of our currency needs, which
for more than fifteen years diluted our circulating medium, undermined
confidence abroad in our financial ability, and at last culminated in distress
and panic at home, has been recently stopped by the repeal of the laws which
forced this reckless scheme upon the country.

The things thus accomplished, notwithstanding their extreme importance and
beneficent effects, fall far short of curing the monetary evils from which we
suffer as a result of long indulgence in ill-advised financial expedients.

The currency denominated United States notes and commonly known as greenbacks
was issued in large volume during the late Civil War and was intended
originally to meet the exigencies of that period. It will be seen by a
reference to the debates in Congress at the time the laws were passed
authorizing the issue of these notes that their advocates declared they were
intended for only temporary use and to meet the emergency of war. In almost if
not all the laws relating to them some provision was made contemplating their
voluntary or compulsory retirement. A large quantity of them, however, were
kept on foot and mingled with the currency of the country, so that at the
close of the year 1874 they amounted to $381,999,073.

Immediately after that date, and in January, 1875, a law was passed providing
for the resumption of specie payments, by which the Secretary of the Treasury
was required whenever additional circulation was issued to national banks to
retire United States notes equal in amount to 80 per cent of such additional
national-bank circulation until such notes were reduced to $300,000,000. This
law further provided that on and after the 1st day of January, 1879, the
United States notes then outstanding should be redeemed in coin, and in order
to provide and prepare for such redemption the Secretary of the Treasury was
authorized not only to use any surplus revenues of the Government, but to
issue bonds of the United States and dispose of them for coin and to use the
proceeds for the purposes contemplated by the statute.

In May, 1878, and before the date thus appointed for the redemption and
retirement of these notes, another statute was passed forbidding their further
cancellation and retirement. Some of them had, however, been previously
redeemed and canceled upon the issue of additional national-bank circulation,
as permitted by the law of 1875, so that the amount outstanding at the time of
the passage of the act forbidding their further retirement was $346,681,016.

The law of 1878 did not stop at distinct prohibition, but contained in
addition the following express provision:

And when any of said notes may be redeemed or be received into the Treasury
under any law from any source whatever, and shall belong to the United States,
they shall not be retired, canceled, or destroyed, but they shall be reissued
and paid out again and kept in circulation.

This was the condition of affairs on the 1st day of January, 1879, which had
been fixed upon four years before as the date for entering upon the redemption
and retirement of all these notes, and for which such abundant means had been
provided.

The Government was put in the anomalous situation of owing to the holders of
its notes debts payable in gold on demand which could neither be retired by
receiving such notes in discharge of obligations due the Government nor
canceled by actual payment in gold. It was forced to redeem without redemption
and to pay without acquittance.

There had been issued and sold $95,500,000 of the bonds authorized by the
resumption act of 1875, the proceeds of which, together with other gold in the
Treasury, created a gold fund deemed sufficient to meet the demands which
might be made upon it for the redemption of the outstanding United States
notes. This fund, together with such other gold as might be from time to time
in the Treasury available for the same purpose, has been since called our gold
reserve, and $100,000,000 has been regarded as an adequate amount to
accomplish its object. This fund amounted on the 1st day of January, 1879, to
$114,193,360, and though thereafter constantly fluctuating it did not fall
below that sum until July, 1892. In April, 1893, for the first time since its
establishment, this reserve amounted to less than $100,000,000, containing at
that date only $97,011,330.

In the meantime, and in July, 1890, an act had been passed directing larger
governmental monthly purchases of silver than had been required under previous
laws, and providing that in payment for such silver Treasury notes of the
United States should be issued payable on demand in gold or silver coin, at
the discretion of the Secretary of the Treasury. It was, however, declared in
the act to be" the established policy of the United States to maintain the two
metals on a parity with each other upon the present legal ratio or such ratio
as may be provided by law." In view of this declaration it was not deemed
permissible for the Secretary of the Treasury to exercise the discretion in
terms conferred on him by refusing to pay gold on these notes when demanded,
because by such discrimination in favor of the gold dollar the so-called
parity of the two metals would be destroyed and grave and dangerous
consequences would be precipitated by affirming or accentuating the constantly
widening disparity between their actual values under the existing ratio.

It thus resulted that the Treasury notes issued in payment of silver purchases
under the law of 1890 were necessarily treated as gold obligations at the
option of the holder. These notes on the 1st day of November, 1893, when the
law compelling the monthly purchase of silver was repealed, amounted to more
than $155,000,000. The notes of this description now outstanding added to the
United States notes still undiminished by redemption or cancellation
constitute a volume of gold obligations amounting to nearly $500,000,000.

These obligations are the instruments which ever since we had a gold reserve
have been used to deplete it.

This reserve, as has been stated, had fallen in April, 1893, to $97,111,330.
It has from that time to the present, with very few and unimportant upward
movements, steadily decreased, except as it has been temporarily replenished
by the sale of bonds.

Among the causes for this constant and uniform shrinkage in this fund may be
mentioned the great falling off of exports under the operation of the tariff
law until recently in force, which crippled our exchange of commodities with
foreign nations and necessitated to some extent the payment of our balances in
gold; the unnatural infusion of silver into our currency and the increasing
agitation for its free and unlimited coinage, which have created apprehension
as to our disposition or ability to continue gold payments; the consequent
hoarding of gold at home and the stoppage of investments of foreign capital,
as well as the return of our securities already sold abroad; and the high rate
of foreign exchange, which induced the shipment of our gold to be drawn
against as a matter of speculation.

In consequence of these conditions the gold reserve on the 1st day of
February, 1894, was reduced to $65,438,377, having lost more than $31,000,000
during the preceding nine months, or since April, 1893. Its replenishment
being necessary and no other manner of accomplishing it being possible, resort
was had to the issue and sale of bonds provided for by the resumption act of
1875. Fifty millions of these bonds were sold, yielding $58,633,295.71, which
was added to the reserve fund of gold then on hand. As a result of this
operation this reserve, which had suffered constant and large withdrawals in
the meantime, stood on the 6th day of March, 1894, at the sum of $107,446,802.
Its depletion was, however, immediately thereafter so accelerated that on the
30th day of June, 1894, it had fallen to $64,873,025, thus losing by
withdrawals more than $42,000,000 in five months and dropping slightly below
its situation when the sale of $50,000,000 in bonds was effected for its
replenishment.

This depressed condition grew worse, and on the 24th day of November, 1894,
our gold reserve being reduced to $57,669,701, it became necessary to again
strengthen it.

This was done by another sale of bonds amounting to $50,000,000, from which
there was realized $58,538,500, with which the fund was increased to
$111,142,021 on the 4th day of December, 1894.

Again disappointment awaited the anxious hope for relief. There was not even a
lull in the exasperating withdrawals of gold. On the contrary, they grew
larger and more persistent than ever. Between the 4th day of December, 1894,
and early in February, 1895, a period of scarcely more than two months after
the second reenforcement of our gold reserve by the sale of bonds, it had lost
by such withdrawals more than $69,000,000 and had fallen to $41,340,181.
Nearly $43,000,000 had been withdrawn within the month immediately preceding
this situation.

In anticipation of impending trouble I had on the 28th day of January, 1895,
addressed a communication to the Congress fully setting forth our difficulties
and dangerous position and earnestly recommending that authority be given the
Secretary of the Treasury to issue bonds bearing a low rate of interest,
payable by their terms in gold, for the purpose of maintaining a sufficient
gold reserve and also for the redemption and cancellation of outstanding
United States notes and the Treasury notes issued for the purchase of silver
under the law of 1890. This recommendation did not, however, meet with
legislative approval.

In February, 1895, therefore, the situation was exceedingly critical. With a
reserve perilously low and a refusal of Congressional aid, everything
indicated that the end of gold payments by the Government was imminent. The
results of prior bond issues had been exceedingly unsatisfactory, and the
large withdrawals of gold immediately succeeding their public sale in open
market gave rise to a reasonable suspicion that a large part of the gold paid
into the Treasury upon such sales was promptly drawn out again by the
presentation of United States notes or Treasury notes, and found its way to
the hands of those who had only temporarily parted with it in the purchase of
bonds.

In this emergency, and in view of its surrounding perplexities, it became
entirely apparent to those upon whom the struggle for safety was devolved not
only that our gold reserve must, for the third time in less than thirteen
months, be restored by another issue and sale of bonds bearing a high rate of
interest and badly suited to the purpose, but that a plan must be adopted for
their disposition promising better results than those realized on previous
sales. An agreement was therefore made with a number of financiers and bankers
whereby it was stipulated that bonds described in the resumption act of 1875,
payable in coin thirty years after their date, bearing interest at the rate of
4 pet cent per annum, and amounting to about $62,000,000, should be exchanged
for gold, receivable by weight, amounting to a little more than $65,000,000.

This gold was to be delivered in such installments as would complete its
delivery within about six months from the date of the contract, and at least
one-half of the amount was to be furnished from abroad. It was also agreed by
those supplying this gold that during the continuance of the contract they
would by every means in their power protect the Government against gold
withdrawals. The contract also provided that if Congress would authorize their
issue bonds payable by their terms in gold and bearing interest at the rate of
3 per cent per annum might within ten days be substituted at par for the 4 per
cent bonds described in the agreement.

On the day this contract was made its terms were communicated to Congress by a
special Executive message, in which it was stated that more than $16,000,000
would be saved to the Government if gold bonds bearing 3 per cent interest
were authorized to be substituted for those mentioned in the contract.

The Congress having declined to grant the necessary authority to secure this
saving, the contract, unmodified, was carried out, resulting in a gold reserve
amounting to $107,571,230 on the 8th day of July, 1895. The performance of
this contract not only restored the reserve, but checked for a time the
withdrawals of gold and brought on a period of restored confidence and such
peace and quiet in business circles as were of the greatest possible value to
every interest that affects our people. I have never had the slightest
misgiving concerning the wisdom or propriety of this arrangement, and am quite
willing to answer for my full share of responsibility for its promotion. I
believe it averted a disaster the imminence of which was, fortunately, not at
the time generally understood by our people.

Though the contract mentioned stayed for a time the tide of gold withdrawal,
its good results could not be permanent. Recent withdrawals have reduced the
reserve from $107,571,230 on the 8th day of July, 1895, to $79,333,966. How
long it will remain large enough to render its increase unnecessary is only
matter of conjecture, though quite large withdrawals for shipment in the
immediate future are predicted in well-informed quarters. About $16,000,000
has been withdrawn during the month of November.

The foregoing statement of events and conditions develops the fact that after
increasing our interest-bearing bonded indebtedness more than $162,000,000 to
save our gold reserve we are nearly where we started, having now in such
reserve $79,333,966, as against $65,438,377 in February, 1894, when the first
bonds were issued.

Though the amount of gold drawn from the Treasury appears to be very large as
gathered from the facts and figures herein presented, it actually was much
larger, considerable sums having been acquired by the Treasury within the
several periods stated without the issue of bonds. On the 28th of January,
1895, it was reported by the Secretary of the Treasury that more than
$172,000,000 of gold had been withdrawn for hoarding or shipment during the
year preceding. He now reports that from January 1, 1879, to July 14, 1890, a
period of more than eleven years, only a little over $28,000,000 was
withdrawn, and that between July 14, 1890, the date of the passage of the law
for an increased purchase of silver, and the 1st day of December, 1895, or
within less than five and a half years, there was withdrawn nearly
$375,000,000, making a total of more than $403,000,000 drawn from the Treasury
in gold since January 1, 1879, the date fixed in 1875 for the retirement of
the United States notes.

Nearly $327,000,000 of the gold thus withdrawn has been paid out on these
United States notes, and yet every one of the $346,000,000 is still uncanceled
and ready to do service in future gold depletions.

More than $76,000,000 in gold has since their creation in 1890 been paid out
from the Treasury upon the notes given on the purchase of silver by the
Government, and yet the whole, amounting to $155,000,000, except a little more
than $16,000,000 which has been retired by exchanges for silver at the request
of the holders, remains outstanding and prepared to join their older and more
experienced allies in future raids upon the Treasury's gold reserve.

In other words, the Government has paid in gold more than nine-tenths of its
United States notes and still owes them all. It has paid in gold about
one-half of its notes given for silver purchases without extinguishing by such
payment one dollar of these notes.

When, added to all this, we are reminded that to carry on this astound, lug
financial scheme the Government has incurred a bonded indebtedness of
$95,500,000 in establishing a gold reserve and of $162,315,400 in efforts to
maintain it; that the annual interest charge on such bonded indebtedness is
more than $11,000,000; that a continuance of our present course may result in
further bond issues, and that we have suffered or are threatened with all this
for the sake of supplying gold for foreign shipment or facilitating its
hoarding at home, a situation is exhibited which certainly ought to arrest
attention and provoke immediate legislative relief.

I am convinced the only thorough and practicable remedy for our troubles is
found in the retirement and cancellation of our United States notes, commonly
called greenbacks, and the outstanding Treasury notes issued by the Government
in payment of silver purchases under the act of 1890.

I believe this could be quite readily accomplished by the exchange of these
notes for United States bonds, of small as well as large denominations,
bearing a low rate of interest. They should be long-term bonds, thus
increasing their desirability as investments, and because their payment could
be well postponed to a period far removed from present financial burdens and
perplexities, when with increased prosperity and resources they would be more
easily met.

To further insure the cancellation of these notes and also provide a way by
which gold may be added to our currency in lieu of them, a feature in the plan
should be an authority given to the Secretary of the Treasury to dispose of
the bonds abroad for gold if necessary to complete the contemplated redemption
and cancellation, permitting him to use the proceeds of such bonds to take up
and cancel any of the notes that may be in the Treasury or that may be
received by the Government on any account.

The increase of our bonded debt involved in this plan would be amply
compensated by renewed activity and enterprise in all business circles, the
restored confidence at home, the reinstated faith in our monetary strength
abroad, and the stimulation of every interest and industry that would follow
the cancellation of the gold-demand obligations now afflicting us. In any
event, the bonds proposed would stand for the extinguishment of a troublesome
indebtedness, while in the path we now follow there lurks the menace of
unending bonds, with our indebtedness still undischarged and aggravated in
every feature. The obligations necessary to fund this indebtedness would not
equal in amount those from which we have been relieved since 1884 by
anticipation and payment beyond the requirements of the sinking fund out of
our surplus revenues.

The currency withdrawn by the retirement of the United States notes and
Treasury notes, amounting to probably less than $486,000,000, might be
supplied by such gold as would be used on their retirement or by an increase
in the circulation of our national banks. Though the aggregate capital of
those now in existence amounts to more than $664,000,000, their outstanding
circulation based on bond security amounts to only about $190,000,000. They
are authorized to issue notes amounting to 90 per cent of the bonds deposited
to secure their circulation, but in no event beyond the amount of their
capital stock, and they are obliged to pay 1 per cent tax on the circulation
they issue.

I think they should be allowed to issue circulation equal to the par value of
the bonds they deposit to secure it, and that the tax on their circulation
should be reduced to one-fourth of 1 per cent, which would undoubtedly meet
all the expense the Government incurs on their account. In addition they
should be allowed to substitute or deposit in lieu of the bonds now required
as security for their circulation those which would be issued for the purpose
of retiring the United States notes and Treasury notes.

The banks already existing, if they desired to avail themselves of the
provisions of law thus modified, could issue circulation, in addition to that
already outstanding, amounting to $478,000,000, which would nearly or quite
equal the currency proposed to be canceled. At any rate, I should confidently
expect to see the existing national banks or others to be organized avail
themselves of the proposed encouragements to issue circulation and promptly
fill any vacuum and supply every currency need.

It has always seemed to me that the provisions of law regarding the capital of
national banks, which operate as a limitation to their location, fail to make
proper compensation for the suppression of State banks, which came near to the
people in all sections of the country and readily furnished them with banking
accommodations and facilities. Any inconvenience or embarrassment arising from
these restrictions on the location of national banks might well be remedied by
better adapting the present system to the creation of banks in smaller
communities or by permitting banks of large capital to establish branches in
such localities as would serve the people, so regulated and restrained as to
secure their safe and conservative control and management.

But there might not be the necessity for such an addition to the currency by
new issues of bank circulation as at first glance is indicated. If we should
be relieved from maintaining a gold reserve under conditions that constitute
it the barometer of our solvency, and if our Treasury should no longer be the
foolish purveyor of gold for nations abroad or for speculation and hoarding by
our citizens at home, I should expect to see gold resume its natural and
normal functions in the business affairs of the country and cease to be an
object attracting the timid watch of our people and exciting their sensitive
imaginations.

I do not overlook the fact that the cancellation of the Treasury notes issued
under the silver-purchasing act of 1890 would leave the Treasury in the actual
ownership of sufficient silver, including seigniorage, to coin nearly
$178,000,000 in standard dollars. It is worthy of consideration whether this
might not from time to time be converted into dollars or fractional coin and
slowly put into circulation, as in the judgment of the Secretary of the
Treasury the necessities of the country should require.

Whatever is attempted should be entered upon fully appreciating the fact that
by careless, easy descent we have reached a dangerous depth, and that our
ascent will not be accomplished without laborious toil and struggle. We shall
be wise if we realize that we are financially ill and that our restoration to
health may require heroic treatment and unpleasant remedies.

In the present stage of our difficulty it is not easy to understand how the
amount of our revenue receipts directly affects it. The important question is
not the quantity of money received in revenue payments, but the kind of money
we maintain and our ability to continue in sound financial condition. We are
considering the Government's holdings of gold as related to the soundness of
our money and as affecting our national credit and monetary strength.

If our gold reserve had never been impaired; if no bonds had ever been issued
to replenish it; if there had been no fear and timidity concerning our ability
to continue gold payments; if any part of our revenues were now paid in gold,
and if we could look to our gold receipts as a means of maintaining a safe
reserve, the amount of our revenues would be an influential factor in the
problem. But, unfortunately, all the circumstances that might lend weight to
this consideration are entirely lacking.

In our present predicament no gold is received by the Government in payment of
revenue charges, nor would there be if the revenues were increased. The
receipts of the Treasury, when not in silver certificates, consist of United
States notes and Treasury notes issued for silver purchases. These forms of
money are only useful to the Government in paying its current ordinary
expenses, and its quantity in Government possession does not in the least
contribute toward giving us that kind of safe financial standing or condition
which is built on gold alone.

If it is said that these notes if held by the Government can be used to obtain
gold for our reserve, the answer is easy. The people draw gold from the
Treasury on demand upon United States notes and Treasury notes, but the
proposition that the Treasury can on demand draw gold from the people upon
them would be regarded in these days with wonder and amusement; and even if
this could be done there is nothing to prevent those thus parting with their
gold from regaining it the next day or the next hour by the presentation of
the notes they received in exchange for it.

The Secretary of the Treasury might use such notes taken from a surplus
revenue to buy gold in the market. Of course he could not do this without
paying a premium. Private holders of gold, unlike the Government, having no
parity to maintain, would not be restrained from making the best bargain
possible when they furnished gold to the Treasury; but the moment the
Secretary of the Treasury bought gold on any terms above par he would
establish a general and universal premium upon it, thus breaking down the
parity between gold and silver, which the Government is pledged to maintain,
and opening the way to new and serious complications. In the meantime the
premium would not remain stationary, and the absurd spectacle might be
presented of a dealer selling gold to the Government and with United States
notes or Treasury notes in his hand immediately clamoring for its return and a
resale at a higher premium.

It may be claimed that a large revenue and redundant receipts might favorably
affect the situation under discussion by affording an opportunity of retaining
these notes in the Treasury when received, and thus preventing their
presentation for gold. Such retention to be useful ought to be at least
measurably permanent; and this is precisely what is prohibited, so far as
United States notes are concerned, by the law of 1878, forbidding their
further retirement. That statute in so many words provides that these notes
when received into the Treasury and belonging to the United States shall be
"paid out again and kept in circulation."

It will, moreover, be readily seen that the Government could not refuse to pay
out United States notes and Treasury notes in current transactions when
demanded, and insist on paying out silver alone, and still maintain the parity
between that metal and the currency representing gold. Besides, the
accumulation in the Treasury of currency of any kind exacted from the people
through taxation is justly regarded as an evil, and it can not proceed far
without vigorous protest against an unjustifiable retention of money from the
business of the country and a denunciation of a scheme of taxation which
proves itself to be unjust when it takes from the earnings and income of the
citizen money so much in excess of the needs of Government support that large
sums can be gathered and kept in the Treasury. Such a condition has heretofore
in times of surplus revenue led the Government to restore currency to the
people by the purchase of its unmatured bonds at a large premium and by a
large increase of its deposits in national banks, and we easily remember that
the abuse of Treasury accumulation has furnished a most persuasive argument in
favor of legislation radically reducing our tariff taxation.

Perhaps it is supposed that sufficient revenue receipts would in a sentimental
way improve the situation by inspiring confidence in our solvency and allaying
the fear of pecuniary exhaustion. And yet through all our struggles to
maintain our gold reserve there never has been any apprehension as to our
ready ability to pay our way with such money as we had, and the question
whether or not our current receipts met our current expenses has not entered
into the estimate of our solvency. Of course the general state of our funds,
exclusive of gold, was entirely immaterial to the foreign creditor and
investor. His debt could only be paid in gold, and his only concern was our
ability to keep on hand that kind of money.

On July 1, 1892, more than a year and a half before the first bonds were
issued to replenish the gold reserve, there was a net balance in the Treasury,
exclusive of such reserve, of less than $13,000,000, but the gold reserve
amounted to more than $114,000,000, which was the quieting feature of the
situation. It was when the stock of gold began rapidly to fall that fright
supervened and our securities held abroad were returned for sale and debts
owed abroad were pressed for payment. In the meantime extensive shipments of
gold and other unfavorable indications caused restlessness and fright among
our people at home. Thereupon the general state of our funds, exclusive of
gold, became also immaterial to them, and they too drew gold from the Treasury
for hoarding against all contingencies. This is plainly shown by the large
increase in the proportion of gold withdrawn which was retained by our own
people as time and threatening incidents progressed. During the fiscal year
ending June 30, 1894, nearly $85,000,000 in gold was withdrawn from the
Treasury and about $77,000,000 was sent abroad, while during the fiscal year
ending June 30, 1895, over $117,000,000 was drawn out, of which only about
$66,000,000 was shipped, leaving the large balance of such withdrawals to be
accounted for by domestic hoarding.

Inasmuch as the withdrawal of our gold has resulted largely from fright, there
is nothing apparent that will prevent its continuance or recurrence, with its
natural consequences, except such a change in our financial methods as will
reassure the frightened and make the desire for gold less intense. It is not
clear how an increase fix revenue, unless it be in gold, can satisfy those
whose only anxiety is to gain gold from the Government's store.

It can not, therefore, be safe to rely upon increased revenues as a cure for
our present troubles.

It is possible that the suggestion of increased revenue as a remedy for the
difficulties we are considering may have originated in an intimation or
distinct allegation that the bonds which have been issued ostensibly to
replenish our gold reserve were really issued to supply insufficient revenue.
Nothing can be further from the truth. Bonds were issued to obtain gold for
the maintenance of our national credit. As has been shown, the gold thus
obtained has been drawn again from the Treasury upon United States notes and
Treasury notes. This operation would have been promptly prevented if possible;
but these notes having thus been passed to the Treasury, they became the money
of the Government, like any other ordinary Government funds, and there was
nothing to do but to use them in paying Government expenses when needed.

At no time when bonds have been issued has there been any consideration of the
question of paying the expenses of Government with their proceeds. There was
no necessity to consider that question. At the time of each bond issue we had
a safe surplus in the Treasury for ordinary operations, exclusive of the gold
in our reserve. In February, 1894, when the first issue of bonds was made,
such surplus amounted to over $18,000,000; in November, when the second issue
was made, it amounted to more than $42,000,000, and in February, 1895, when
bonds for the third time were issued, such surplus amounted to more than
$100,000,000. It now amounts to $98,072,420.30.

Besides all this, the Secretary of the Treasury had no authority whatever to
issue bonds to increase the ordinary revenues or pay current expenses.

I can not but think there has been some confusion of ideas regarding the
effects of the issue of bonds and the results of the withdrawal of gold. It
was the latter process, and not the former, that, by substituting in the
Treasury United States notes and Treasury notes for gold, increased by their
amount the money which was in the first instance subject to ordinary
Government expenditure.

Although the law compelling an increased purchase of silver by the Government
was passed on the 14th day of July, 1890, withdrawals of gold from the
Treasury upon the notes given in payment on such purchases did not begin until
October, 1891. Immediately following that date the withdrawals upon both these
notes and United States notes increased very largely, and have continued to
such an extent that since the passage of that law there has been more than
thirteen times as much gold taken out of the Treasury upon United States notes
and Treasury notes issued for silver purchases as was thus withdrawn during
the eleven and a half years immediately prior thereto and after the 1st day of
January, 1879, when specie payments were resumed.

It is neither unfair nor unjust to charge a large share of our present
financial perplexities and dangers to the operation of the laws of 1878 and
1890 compelling the purchase of silver by the Government, which not only
furnished a new Treasury obligation upon which its gold could be withdrawn,
but so increased the fear of an overwhelming flood of silver and a forced
descent to silver payments that even the repeal of these laws did not entirely
cure the evils of their existence.

While I have endeavored to make a plain statement of the disordered condition
of our currency and the present dangers menacing our prosperity and to suggest
a way which leads to a safer financial system, I have constantly had in mind
the fact that many of my countrymen, whose sincerity I do not doubt, insist
that the cure for the ills now threatening us may be found in the single and
simple remedy of the free coinage of silver. They contend that our mints shall
be at once thrown open to the free, unlimited, and independent coinage of both
gold and silver dollars of full legal-tender quality, regardless of the action
of any other government and in full view of the fact that the ratio between
the metals which they suggest calls for 100 cents' worth of gold in the gold
dollar at the present standard and only 50 cents in intrinsic worth of silver
in the silver dollar.

Were there infinitely stronger reasons than can be adduced for hoping that
such action would secure for us a bimetallic currency moving on lines of
parity, an experiment so novel and hazardous as that proposed might well
stagger those who believe that stability is an imperative condition of sound
money.

No government, no human contrivance or act of legislation, has ever been able
to hold the two metals together in free coinage at a ratio appreciably
different from that which is established in the markets of the world.

Those who believe that our independent free coinage of silver at an artificial
ratio with gold of 16 to 1 would restore the parity between the metals, and
consequently between the coins, oppose an unsupported and improbable theory to
the general belief and practice of other nations; and to the teaching of the
wisest statesmen and economists of the world, both in the past and present,
and, what is far more conclusive, they run counter to our own actual
experiences.

Twice in our earlier history our lawmakers, in attempting to establish a
bimetallic currency, undertook free coinage upon a ratio which accidentally
varied from the actual relative values of the two metals not more than 3 per
cent. In both cases, notwithstanding greater difficulties and cost of
transportation than now exist, the coins whose intrinsic worth was
undervalued. in the ratio gradually and surely disappeared from our
circulation and went to other countries where their real value was better
recognized.

Acts of Congress were impotent to create equality where natural causes decreed
even a slight inequality.

Twice in our recent history we have signally failed to raise by legislation
the value of silver. Under an act of Congress passed in 1878 the Government
was required for more than twelve years to expend annually at least
$24,000,000 in the purchase of silver bullion for coinage. The act of July 14,
1890, in a still bolder effort, increased the amount of silver the Government
was compelled to purchase and forced it to become the buyer annually of
54,000,000 ounces, or practically the entire product of our mines. Under both
laws silver rapidly and steadily declined in value. The prophecy and the
expressed hope and expectation of those in the Congress who led in the passage
of the last-mentioned act that it would reestablish and maintain the former
parity between the two metals are still fresh in our memory.

In the light of these experiences, which accord with the experiences of other
nations, there is certainly no secure ground for the belief that an act of
Congress could now bridge an inequality of 50 per cent between gold and silver
at our present ratio, nor is there the least possibility that our country,
which has less than one-seventh of the silver money in the world, could by its
action alone raise not only our own but all silver to its lost ratio with
gold. Our attempt to accomplish this by the free coinage of silver at a ratio
differing widely from actual relative values would be the signal for the
complete departure of gold from our circulation, the immediate and large
contraction of our circulating medium, and a shrinkage in the real value and
monetary efficiency of all other forms of currency as they settled to the
level of silver monometallism. Everyone who receives a fixed salary and every
worker for wages would find the dollar in his hand ruthlessly scaled down to
the point of bitter disappointment, if not to pinching privation.

A change in our standard to silver monometallism would also bring on a
collapse of the entire system of credit, which, when based on a standard which
is recognized and adopted by the world of business, is many times more potent
and useful than the entire volume of currency and is safely capable of almost
indefinite expansion to meet the growth of trade and enterprise. In a
self-invited struggle through darkness and uncertainty our humiliation would
be increased by the consciousness that we had parted company with all the
enlightened and progressive nations of the world and were desperately and
hopelessly striving to meet the stress of modern commerce and competition with
a debased and unsuitable currency and in association with the few weak and
laggard nations which have silver alone as their standard of value.

All history warns us against rash experiments which threaten violent changes
in our monetary standard and the degradation of our currency. The past is full
of lessons teaching not only the economic dangers but the national immorality
that follow in the train of such experiments. I will not believe that the
American people can be persuaded after sober deliberation to jeopardize their
nation's prestige and proud standing by encouraging financial nostrums, nor
that they will yield to the false allurements of cheap money when they realize
that it must result in the weakening of that financial integrity and rectitude
which thus far in our history has been so devotedly cherished as one of the
traits of true Americanism.

Our country's indebtedness, whether owing by the Government or existing
between individuals, has been contracted with reference to our present
standard. To decree by act of Congress that these debts shall be payable in
less valuable dollars than those within the contemplation and intention of the
parties when contracted would operate to transfer by the fiat of law and
without compensation an amount of property and a volume of rights and
interests almost incalculable.

Those who advocate a blind and headlong plunge to free coinage in the name of
bimetallism, and professing the belief, contrary to all experience, that we
could thus establish a double standard and a concurrent circulation of both
metals in our coinage, are certainly reckoning from a cloudy standpoint. Our
present standard of value is the standard of the civilized world and permits
the only bimetallism now possible, or at least that is within the independent
reach of any single nation, however powerful that nation may be. While the
value of gold as a standard is steadied by almost universal commercial and
business use, it does not despise silver nor seek its banishment. Wherever
this standard is maintained there is at its side in free and unquestioned
circulation a volume of silver currency sometimes equaling and sometimes even
exceeding it in amount both maintained at a parity notwithstanding a
depreciation or fluctuation in the intrinsic value of silver.

There is a vast difference between a standard of value and a currency for
monetary use. The standard must necessarily be fixed and certain. The currency
may be in divers forms and of various kinds. No silver-standard country has a
gold currency in circulation, but an enlightened and wise system of finance
secures the benefits of both gold and silver as currency and circulating
medium by keeping the standard stable and all other currency at par with it.
Such a system and such a standard also give free scope for the use and
expansion of safe and conservative credit, so indispensable to broad and
growing commercial transactions and so well substituted for the actual use of
money. If a fixed and stable standard is maintained, such as the magnitude and
safety of our commercial transactions and business require, the use of money
itself is conveniently minimized.

Every dollar of fixed and stable value has through the agency of confident
credit an astonishing capacity of multiplying itself in financial work. Every
unstable and fluctuating dollar fails as a basis of credit, and in its use
begets gambling speculation and undermines the foundations of honest
enterprise.

I have ventured to express myself on this subject with earnestness and
plainness of speech because I can not rid myself of the belief that there lurk
in the proposition for the free coinage of silver, so strongly approved and so
enthusiastically advocated by a multitude of my countrymen, a serious menace
to our prosperity and an insidious temptation of our people to wander from the
allegiance they owe to public and private integrity. It is because I do not
distrust the good faith and sincerity of those who press this scheme that I
have imperfectly but with zeal submitted my thoughts upon this momentous
subject. I can not refrain from begging them to reexamine their views and
beliefs in the light of patriotic reason and familiar experience and to weigh
again and again the consequences of such legislation as their efforts have
invited. Even the continued agitation of the subject adds greatly to the
difficulties of a dangerous financial situation already forced upon us.

In conclusion I especially entreat the people's representatives in the
Congress, who are charged with the responsibility of inaugurating measures for
the safety and prosperity of our common country, to promptly and effectively
consider the ills of our critical financial plight. I have suggested a remedy
which my judgment approves. I desire, however, to assure the Congress that I
am prepared to cooperate with them in perfecting any other measure promising
thorough and practical relief, and that I will gladly labor with them in every
patriotic endeavor to further the interests and guard the welfare of our
countrymen, whom in our respective places of duty we have undertaken to serve.

GROVER CLEVELAND

1896:
To the Congress of the United States:

As representatives of the people in the legislative branch of their
Government, you have assembled at a time when the strength and excellence of
our free institutions and the fitness of our citizens to enjoy popular rule
have been again made manifest. A political contest involving momentous
consequences, fraught with feverish apprehension, and creating aggressiveness
so intense as to approach bitterness and passion has been waged throughout our
land and determined by the decree of free and independent suffrage without
disturbance of our tranquillity or the least sign of weakness in our national
structure.

When we consider these incidents and contemplate the peaceful obedience and
manly submission which have succeeded a heated clash of political opinions, we
discover abundant evidence of a determination on the part of our countrymen to
abide by every verdict of the popular will and to be controlled at all times
by an abiding faith in the agencies established for the direction of the
affairs of their Government.

Thus our people exhibit a patriotic disposition which entitles them to demand
of those who undertake to make and execute their laws such faithful and
unselfish service in their behalf as can only be prompted by a serious
appreciation of the trust and confidence which the acceptance of public duty
invites.

In obedience to a constitutional requirement I herein submit to the Congress
certain information concerning national affairs, with the suggestion of such
legislation as in my judgment is necessary and expedient. To secure brevity
and avoid tiresome narration I shall omit many details concerning matters
within Federal control which, though by no means unimportant, are more
profitably discussed in departmental reports. I shall also further curtail
this communication by omitting a minute recital of many minor incidents
connected with our foreign relations which have heretofore found a place in
Executive messages, but are now contained in a report of the Secretary of
State, which is herewith submitted.

At the outset of a reference to the more important matters affecting our
relations with foreign powers it would afford me satisfaction if I could
assure the Congress that the disturbed condition in Asiatic Turkey had during
the past year assumed a less hideous and bloody aspect and that, either as a
consequence of the awakening of the Turkish Government to the demands of
humane civilization or as the result of decisive action on the part of the
great nations having the right by treaty to interfere for the protection of
those exposed to the rage of mad bigotry and cruel fanaticism, the shocking
features of the situation had been mitigated. Instead, however, of welcoming a
softened disposition or protective intervention, we have been afflicted by
continued and not unfrequent reports of the wanton destruction of homes and
the bloody butchery of men, women, and children, made martyrs to their
profession of Christian faith.

While none of our citizens in Turkey have thus far been killed or wounded,
though often in the midst of dreadful scenes of danger, their safety in the
future is by no means assured. Our Government at home and our minister at
Constantinople have left nothing undone to protect our missionaries in Ottoman
territory, who constitute nearly all the individuals residing there who have a
right to claim our protection on the score of American citizenship. Our
efforts in this direction will not be relaxed; but the deep feeling and
sympathy that have been aroused among our people ought not to so far blind
their reason and judgment as to lead them to demand impossible things. The
outbreaks of the blind fury which lead to murder and pillage in Turkey occur
suddenly and without notice, and an attempt on our part to force such a
hostile presence there as might be effective for prevention or protection
would not only be resisted by the Ottoman Government, but would be regarded as
an interruption of their plans by the great nations who assert their exclusive
right to intervene in their own time and method for the security of life and
property in Turkey.

Several naval vessels are stationed in the Mediterranean as a measure of
caution and to furnish all possible relief and refuge in case of emergency.

We have made claims against the Turkish Government for the pillage and
destruction of missionary property at Harpoot and Marash during uprisings at
those places. Thus far the validity of these demands has not been admitted,
though our minister, prior to such outrages and in anticipation of danger,
demanded protection for the persons and property of our missionary citizens in
the localities mentioned and notwithstanding that strong evidence exists of
actual complicity of Turkish soldiers in the work of destruction and robbery.

The facts as they now appear do not permit us to doubt the justice of these
claims, and nothing will be omitted to bring about their prompt settlement.

A number of Armenian refugees having arrived at our ports, an order has lately
been obtained from the Turkish Government permitting the wives and children of
such refugees to join them here. It is hoped that hereafter no obstacle will
be interposed to prevent the escape of all those who seek to avoid the perils
which threaten them in Turkish dominions.

Our recently appointed consul to Erzerum is at his post and discharging the
duties of his office, though for some unaccountable reason his formal
exequatur from the Sultan has not been issued.

I do not believe that the present somber prospect in Turkey will be long
permitted to offend the sight of Christendom. It so mars the humane and
enlightened civilization that belongs to the close of the nineteenth century
that it seems hardly possible that the earnest demand of good people
throughout the Christian world for its corrective treatment will remain
unanswered.

The insurrection in Cuba still continues with all its perplexities. It is
difficult to perceive that any progress has thus far been made toward the
pacification of the island or that the situation of affairs as depicted in my
last annual message has in the least improved. If Spain still holds Havana and
the seaports and all the considerable towns, the insurgents still roam at will
over at least two-thirds of the inland country. If the determination of Spain
to put down the insurrection seems but to strengthen with the lapse of time
and is evinced by her unhesitating devotion of largely increased military and
naval forces to the task, there is much reason to believe that the insurgents
have gained in point of numbers and character and resources and are none the
less inflexible in their resolve not to succumb without practically securing
the great objects for which they took up arms. If Spain has not yet
reestablished her authority, neither have the insurgents yet made good their
title to be regarded as an independent state. Indeed, as the contest has gone
on the pretense that civil government exists on the island, except so far as
Spain is able to maintain it, has been practically abandoned. Spain does keep
on foot such a government, more or less imperfectly, in the large towns and
their immediate suburbs; but that exception being made, the entire country is
either given over to anarchy or is subject to the military occupation of one
or the other party. It is reported, indeed, on reliable authority that at the
demand of the commander in chief of the insurgent army the putative Cuban
government has now given up all attempt to exercise its functions, leaving
that government confessedly (what there is the best reason for supposing it
always to have been in fact) a government merely on paper.

Were the Spanish armies able to meet their antagonists in the open or in
pitched battle, prompt and decisive results might be looked for, and the
immense superiority of the Spanish forces in numbers, discipline, and
equipment could hardly fail to tell greatly to their advantage. But they are
called upon to face a foe that shuns general engagements, that can choose and
does choose its own ground, that from the nature of the country is visible or
invisible at pleasure, and that fights only from ambuscade and when all the
advantages of position and numbers are on its side. In a country where all
that is indispensable to life in the way of food, clothing, and shelter is so
easily obtainable, especially by those born and bred on the soil, it is
obvious that there is hardly a limit to the time during which hostilities of
this sort may be prolonged. Meanwhile, as in all cases of protracted civil
strife, the passions of the combatants grow more and more inflamed and
excesses on both sides become more frequent and more deplorable. They are also
participated in by bands of marauders, who, now in the name of one party and
now in the name of the other, as may best suit the occasion, harry the country
at will and plunder its wretched inhabitants for their own advantage. Such a
condition of things would inevitably entail immense destruction of property,
even if it were the policy of both parties to prevent it as far as
practicable; but while such seemed to be the original policy of the Spanish
Government, it has now apparently abandoned it and is acting upon the same
theory as the insurgents, namely, that the exigencies of the contest require
the wholesale annihilation of property that it may not prove of use and
advantage to the enemy.

It is to the same end that, in pursuance of general orders, Spanish garrisons
are now being withdrawn from plantations and the rural population required to
concentrate itself in the towns. The sure result would seem to be that the
industrial value of the island is fast diminishing and that unless there is a
speedy and radical change in existing conditions it will soon disappear
altogether. That value consists very largely, of course, in its capacity to
produce sugar--a capacity already much reduced by the interruptions to tillage
which have taken place during the last two years. It is reliably asserted that
should these interruptions continue during the current year, and practically
extend, as is now threatened, to the entire sugar-producing territory of the
island, so much time and so much money will be required to restore the land to
its normal productiveness that it is extremely doubtful if capital can be
induced to even make the attempt.

The spectacle of the utter ruin of an adjoining country, by nature one of the
most fertile and charming on the globe, would engage the serious attention of
the Government and people of the United States in any circumstances. In point
of fact, they have a concern with it which is by no means of a wholly
sentimental or philanthropic character. It lies so near to us as to be hardly
separated from our territory. Our actual pecuniary interest in it is second
only to that of the people and Government of Spain. It is reasonably estimated
that at least from $30,000,000 to $50,000,000 of American capital are invested
in plantations and in railroad, mining, and other business enterprises on the
island. The volume of trade between the United States and Cuba, which in 1889
amounted to about $64,000,000, rose in 1893 to about $103,000,000, and in
1894, the year before the present insurrection broke out, amounted to nearly
$96,000,000. Besides this large pecuniary stake in the fortunes of Cuba, the
United States finds itself inextricably involved in the present contest in
other ways, both vexatious and costly.

Many Cubans reside in this country, and indirectly promote the insurrection
through the press, by public meetings, by the purchase and shipment of arms,
by the raising of funds, and by other means which the spirit of our
institutions and the tenor of our laws do not permit to be made the subject of
criminal prosecutions. Some of them, though Cubans at heart and in all their
feelings and interests, have taken out papers as naturalized citizens of the
United States--a proceeding resorted to with a view to possible protection by
this Government, and not unnaturally regarded with much indignation by the
country of their origin. The insurgents are undoubtedly encouraged and
supported by the widespread sympathy the people of this country always and
instinctively feel for every struggle for better and freer government, and
which, in the case of the more adventurous and restless elements of our
population, leads in only too many instances to active and personal
participation in the contest. The result is that this Government is constantly
called upon to protect American citizens, to claim damages for injuries to
persons and property, now estimated at many millions of dollars, and to ask
explanations and apologies for the acts of Spanish officials whose zeal for
the repression of rebellion sometimes blinds them to the immunities belonging
to the unoffending citizens of a friendly power. It follows from the same
causes that the United States is compelled to actively police a long line of
seacoast against unlawful expeditions, the escape of which the utmost
vigilance will not always suffice to prevent.

These inevitable entanglements of the United States with the rebellion in
Cuba, the large American property interests affected, and considerations of
philanthropy and humanity in general have led to a vehement demand in various
quarters for some sort of positive intervention on the part of the United
States. It was at first proposed that belligerent rights should be accorded to
the insurgents--a proposition no longer urged because untimely and in
practical operation dearly perilous and injurious to our own interests. It has
since been and is now sometimes contended that the independence of the
insurgents should be recognized; but imperfect and restricted as the Spanish
government of the island may be, no other exists there, unless the will of the
military officer in temporary command of a particular district can be
dignified as a species of government. It is now also suggested that the United
States should buy the island--a suggestion possibly worthy of consideration if
there were any evidence of a desire or willingness on the part of Spain to
entertain such a proposal. It is urged finally that, all other methods
failing, the existing internecine strife in Cuba should be terminated by our
intervention, even at the cost of a war between the United States and Spain--a
war which its advocates confidently prophesy could neither be large in its
proportions nor doubtful in its issue.

The correctness of this forecast need be neither affirmed nor denied. The
United States has, nevertheless, a character to maintain as a nation, which
plainly dictates that right and not might should be the rule of its conduct.
Further, though the United States is not a nation to which peace is a
necessity, it is in truth the most pacific of powers and desires nothing so
much as to live in amity with all the world. Its own ample and diversified
domains satisfy all possible longings for territory, preclude all dreams of
conquest, and prevent any casting of covetous eyes upon neighboring regions,
however attractive. That our conduct toward Spain and her dominions has
constituted no exception to this national disposition is made manifest by the
course of our Government, not only thus far during the present insurrection,
but during the ten years that followed the rising at Yara in 1868. No other
great power, it may safely be said, under circumstances of similar perplexity,
would have manifested the same restraint and the same patient endurance. It
may also be said that this persistent attitude of the United States toward
Spain in connection with Cuba unquestionably evinces no slight respect and
regard for Spain on the part of the American people. They in truth do not
forget her connection with the discovery of the Western Hemisphere, nor do
they underestimate the great qualities of the Spanish people nor fail to fully
recognize their splendid patriotism and their chivalrous devotion to the
national honor.

They view with wonder and admiration the cheerful resolution with which vast
bodies of men are sent across thousands of miles of ocean and an enormous debt
accumulated that the costly possession of the gem of the Antilles may still
hold its place in the Spanish crown. And yet neither the Government nor the
people of the United States have shut their eyes to the course of events in
Cuba or have failed to realize the existence of conceded grievances which have
led to the present revolt from the authority of Spain--grievances recognized
by the Queen Regent and by the Cortes, voiced by the most patriotic and
enlightened of Spanish statesmen, without regard to party, and demonstrated by
reforms proposed by the executive and approved by the legislative branch of
the Spanish Government. It is in the assumed temper and disposition of the
Spanish Government to remedy these grievances, fortified by indications of
influential public opinion in Spain, that this Government has hoped to
discover the most promising and effective means of composing the present
strife with honor and advantage to Spain and with the achievement of all the
reasonable objects of the insurrection.

It would seem that if Spain should offer to Cuba genuine autonomy--a measure
of home rule which, while preserving the sovereignty of Spain, would satisfy
all rational requirements of her Spanish subjects--there should be no just
reason why the pacification of the island might not be effected on that basis.
Such a result would appear to be in the true interest of all concerned. It
would at once stop the conflict which is now consuming the resources of the
island and making it worthless for whichever party may ultimately prevail. It
would keep intact the possessions of Spain without touching her honor, which
will be consulted rather than impugned by the adequate redress of admitted
grievances. It would put the prosperity of the island and the fortunes of its
inhabitants within their own control without severing the natural and ancient
ties which bind them to the mother country, and would yet enable them to test
their capacity for self-government under the most favorable conditions. It has
been objected on the one side that Spain should not promise autonomy until her
insurgent subjects lay down their arms; on the other side, that promised
autonomy, however liberal, is insufficient, because without assurance of the
promise being fulfilled.

But the reasonableness of a requirement by Spain of unconditional surrender on
the part of the insurgent Cubans before their autonomy is conceded is not
altogether apparent. It ignores important features of the situation--the
stability two years' duration has given to the insurrection; the feasibility
of its indefinite prolongation in the nature of things, and, as shown by past
experience, the utter and imminent ruin of the island unless the present
strife is speedily composed; above all, the rank abuses which all parties in
Spain, all branches of her Government, and all her leading public men concede
to exist and profess a desire to remove. Facing such circumstances, to
withhold the proffer of needed reforms until the parties demanding them put
themselves at mercy by throwing down their arms has the appearance of
neglecting the gravest of perils and inviting suspicion as to the sincerity of
any professed willingness to grant reforms. The objection on behalf of the
insurgents that promised reforms can not be relied upon must of course be
considered, though we have no right to assume and no reason for assuming that
anything Spain undertakes to do for the relief of Cuba will not be done
according to both the spirit and the letter of the undertaking.

Nevertheless, realizing that suspicions and precautions on the part of the
weaker of two combatants are always natural and not always unjustifiable,
being sincerely desirous in the interest of both as well as on its own account
that the Cuban problem should be solved with the least possible delay, it was
intimated by this Government to the Government of Spain some months ago that
if a satisfactory measure of home rule were tendered the Cuban insurgents and
would be accepted by them upon a guaranty of its execution the United States
would endeavor to find a way not objectionable to Spain of furnishing such
graranty. While no definite response to this intimation has yet been received
from the Spanish Government, it is believed to be not altogether unwelcome,
while, as already suggested, no reason is perceived why it should not be
approved by the insurgents. Neither party can fail to see the importance of
early action, and both must realize that to prolong the present state of
things for even a short period will add enormously to the time and labor and
expenditure necessary to bring about the industrial recuperation of the
island. It is therefore fervently hoped on all grounds that earnest efforts
for healing the breach between Spain and the insurgent Cubans upon the lines
above indicated may be at once inaugurated and pushed to an immediate and
successful issue. The friendly offices of the United States, either in the
manner above outlined or in any other way consistent with our Constitution and
laws, will always be at the disposal of either party.

Whatever circumstances may arise, our policy and our interests would constrain
us to object to the acquisition of the island or an interference with its
control by any other power.

It should be added that it can not be reasonably assumed that the hitherto
expectant attitude of the United States will be indefinitely maintained. While
we are anxious to accord all due respect to the sovereignty of Spain, we can
not view the pending conflict in all its features and properly apprehend our
inevitably close relations to it and its possible results without considering
that by the course of events we may be drawn into such an unusual and
unprecedented condition as will fix a limit to our patient waiting for Spain
to end the contest, either alone and in her own way or with our friendly
cooperation.

When the inability of Spain to deal successfully with the insurrection has
become manifest and it is demonstrated that her sovereignty is extinct in Cuba
for all purposes of its rightful existence, and when a hopeless struggle for
its reestablishment has degenerated into a strife which means nothing more
than the useless sacrifice of human life and the utter destruction of the very
subject-matter of the conflict, a situation will be presented in which our
obligations to the sovereignty of Spain will be superseded by higher
obligations, which we can hardly hesitate to recognize and discharge.
Deferring the choice of ways and methods until the time for action arrives, we
should make them depend upon the precise conditions then existing; and they
should not be determined upon without giving careful heed to every
consideration involving our honor and interest or the international duty we
owe to Spain. Until we face the contingencies suggested or the situation is by
other incidents imperatively changed we should continue in the line of conduct
heretofore pursued, thus in all circumstances exhibiting our obedience to the
requirements of public law and our regard for the duty enjoined upon us by the
position we occupy in the family of nations.

A contemplation of emergencies that may arise should plainly lead us to avoid
their creation, either through a careless disregard of present duty or even an
undue stimulation and ill-timed expression of feeling. But I have deemed it
not amiss to remind the Congress that a time may arrive when a correct policy
and care for our interests, as well as a regard for the interests of other
nations and their citizens, joined by considerations of humanity and a desire
to see a rich and fertile country intimately related to us saved from complete
devastation, will constrain our Government to such action as will subserve the
interests thus involved and at the same time promise to Cuba and its
inhabitants an opportunity to enjoy the blessings of peace.

The Venezuelan boundary question has ceased to be a matter of difference
between Great Britain and the United States, their respective Governments
having agreed upon the substantial provisions of a treaty between Great
Britain and Venezuela submitting the whole controversy to arbitration. The
provisions of the treaty are so eminently just and fair that the assent of
Venezuela thereto may confidently be anticipated.

Negotiations for a treaty of general arbitration for all differences between
Great Britain and the United States are far advanced and promise to reach a
successful consummation at an early date.

The scheme of examining applicants for certain consular positions to test
their competency and fitness, adopted under an Executive order issued on the
20th of September, 1895, has fully demonstrated the usefulness of this
innovation. In connection with this plan of examination promotions and
transfers of deserving incumbents have been quite extensively made, with
excellent results.

During the past year 35 appointments have been made in the consular service,
27 of which were made to fill vacancies caused by death or resignation or to
supply newly created posts, 2 to succeed incumbents removed for cause, 2 for
the purpose of displacing alien consular officials by American citizens, and 4
merely changing the official title of incumbent from commercial agent to
consul. Twelve of these appointments were transfers or promotions from other
positions under the Department of State, 4 of those appointed had rendered
previous service under the Department, 8 were made of persons who passed a
satisfactory examination, 7 were appointed to places not included in the order
of September 20, 1895, and 4 appointments, as above stated, involved no change
of incumbency. The inspection of consular offices provided for by an
appropriation for that purpose at the last session of the Congress has been
productive of such wholesome effects that I hope this important work will in
the future be continued. I know of nothing that can be done with the same
slight expense so improving to the service.

I desire to repeat the recommendation contained in my last annual message in
favor of providing at public expense official residences for our ambassadors
and ministers at foreign capitals. The reasons supporting this recommendation
are strongly stated in the report of the Secretary of State, and the subject
seems of such importance that I hope it may receive the early attention of the
Congress.

We have during the last year labored faithfully and against unfavorable
conditions to secure better preservation of seal life in the Bering Sea. Both
the United States and Great Britain have lately dispatched commissioners to
these waters to study the habits and condition of the seal herd and the causes
of their rapid decrease. Upon the reports of these commissioners, soon to be
submitted, and with the exercise of patience and good sense on the part of all
interested parties, it is earnestly hoped that hearty cooperation may be
secured for the protection against threatened extinction of seal life in the
Northern Pacific and Bering Sea.

The Secretary of the Treasury reports that during the fiscal year ended June
30, 1896, the receipts of the Government from all sources amounted to
$409,475,408.78. During the same period its expenditures were $434,678,654.48,
the excess of expenditures over receipts thus amounting to $25,203,245.70. The
ordinary expenditures during the year were $4,015,852.21 less than during the
preceding fiscal year. Of the receipts mentioned there was derived from
customs the sum of $160,021,751.67 and from internal revenue $146,830,615.66.
The receipts from customs show an increase of $7,863,134.22 over those from
the same source for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1895, and the receipts from
internal revenue an increase of $3,584,537.91.

The value of our imported dutiable merchandise during the last fiscal year was
$369,757,470 and the value of free goods imported $409,967,470, being an
increase of $6,523,675 in the value of dutiable goods and $41,231,034 in the
value of free goods over the preceding year. Our exports of merchandise,
foreign and domestic, amounted in value to $882,606,938, being an increase
over the preceding year of $75,068,773. The average ad valorem duty paid on
dutiable goods imported during the year was 39.94 per cent and on free and
dutiable goods taken together 20.55 per cent.

The cost of collecting our internal revenue was 2.78 per cent, as against 2.81
per cent for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1895. The total production of
distilled spirits, exclusive of fruit brandies, was 86,588,703 taxable
gallons, being an increase of 6,639,108 gallons over the preceding year. There
was also an increase of 1,443,676 gallons of spirits produced from fruit as
compared with the preceding year. The number of barrels of beer produced was
35,859,250, as against 33,589,784 produced in the preceding fiscal year, being
all increase of 2,269,466 barrels.

The total amount of gold exported during the last fiscal year was $112,409,947
and of silver $60,541,670, being an increase of $45,941,466 of gold and
$13,246,384 of silver over the exportations of the preceding fiscal year. The
imports of gold were $33,525,065 and of silver $28,777,186, being $2,859,695
less of gold and $8,566,007 more of silver than during the preceding year.

The total stock of metallic money in the United States at the close of the
last fiscal year, ended on the 30th day of June, 1896, was $1,228,326,035, of
which $599,597,964 was in gold and $628,728,071 in silver.

On the 1st day of November, 1896, the total stock of money of all kinds in the
country was $2,285,410,590, and the amount in circulation, not including that
in the Treasury holdings, was $1,627,055,641, being $22.63 per capita upon an
estimated population of 71,902,000.

The production of the precious metals in the United States during the calendar
year 1895 is estimated to have been 2,254,760 fine ounces of gold, of the
value of $46,610,000, and 55,727,000 fine ounces of silver, of the commercial
value of $36,445,000 and the coinage value of $72,051,000. The estimated
production of these metals throughout the world during the same period was
9,688,821 fine ounces of gold, amounting to $200,285,700 in value, and
169,189,249 fine ounces of silver, of the commercial value of $110,654,000 and
of the coinage value of $218,738,100 according to our ratio.

The coinage of these metals in the various countries of the world during the
same calendar year amounted to $232,701,438 in gold and $121,996,219 in
silver.

The total coinage at the mints of the United States during the fiscal year
ended June 30, 1896, amounted to $71,188,468.52, of which $58,878,490 was in
gold coins and $12,309,978.52 in standard silver dollars, subsidiary coins,
and minor coins

The number of national banks organized from the time the law authorizing their
creation was passed up to October 31, 1896, was 5,051, and of this number
3,679 were at the date last mentioned in active operation, having authorized
capital stock of $650,014,895, held by 288,902 shareholders, and circulating
notes amounting to $211,412,620.

The total outstanding circulating notes of all national banks on the 31st day
of October, 1896, amounted to $234,553,807, including unredeemed but fully
secured notes of banks insolvent and in process of liquidation. The increase
in national-bank circulation during the year ending on that day was
$21,099,429. On October 6, 1896, when the condition of national banks was last
reported, the total resources of the 3,679 active institutions were
$3,263,685,313.83, which included $1,893,268,839.31 in loans and discounts and
$362,165,733.85 in money of all kinds on hand. Of their liabilities
$1,597,891,058.03 was due to individual depositors and $209,944,019 consisted
of outstanding circulating notes.

There were organized during the year preceding the date last mentioned 28
national banks, located in 15 States, of which 12 were organized in the
Eastern States, with a capital of $1,180,000, 6 in the Western States, with a
capital of $875,000, and 10 in the Southern States, with a capital of
$1,190,000. During the year, however, 37 banks voluntarily abandoned their
franchises under the national law, and in the case of 27 others it was found
necessary to appoint receivers. Therefore, as compared with the year
preceding, there was a decrease of 36 in the number of active banks.

The number of existing banks organized under State laws is 5,708. The number
of immigrants arriving in the United States during the fiscal year was
343,267, of whom 340,468 were permitted to land and 2,799 were debarred on
various grounds prescribed by law and returned to the countries whence they
came at the expense of the steamship companies by which they were brought in.
The increase in immigration over the preceding year amounted to 84,731. It is
reported that with some exceptions the immigrants of the past year were of a
hardy laboring class, accustomed and able to earn a support for themselves,
and it is estimated that the money brought with them amounted to at least
$5,000,000, though it was probably much in excess of that sum, since only
those having less than $30 are required to disclose the exact amount, and it
is known that many brought considerable sums of money to buy land and build
homes. Including all the immigrants arriving who were over 14 years of age,
28.63 per cent were illiterate, as against 20.37 per cent of those of that age
arriving during the preceding fiscal year. The number of immigrants over 14
years old, the countries from which they came, and the percentage of
illiterates among them were as follows: Italy, 57,515, with 54.59 per cent;
Ireland, 37,496, with 7 per cent; Russia, 35,188, with 41.14 per cent;
Austria-Hungary and provinces, 57,053, with 38.92 per cent; Germany, 25,334,
with 2.96 per cent; Sweden, 18,821, with 1.16 per cent; while from Portugal
there came 2,067, of whom 77.69 per cent were illiterate. There arrived from
Japan during the year only 1,110 immigrants, and it is the opinion of the
immigration authorities that the apprehension heretofore existing to some
extent of a large immigration from Japan to the United States is without any
substantial foundation.

From the Life-Saving Service it is reported that the number of disasters to
documented vessels within the limits of its operations during the year was
437. These vessels had on board 4,608 persons, of whom 4,595 were saved and 13
lost. The value of such vessels is estimated at $8,880,140 and of their
cargoes $3,846,380, making the total value of property imperiled $12,726,520.
Of this amount $11,292,707 was saved and $1,432,750 was lost. Sixty-seven of
the vessels were totally wrecked. There were besides 243 casualties to small
undocumented craft, on board of which there were 594 persons, of whom 587 were
saved and 7 were lost. The value of the property involved in these latter
casualties is estimated at $119,265, of which $114,915 was saved and $4,350
was lost. The life-saving crews during the year also rescued or assisted
numerous other vessels and warned many from danger by signals, both by day and
night. The number of disasters during the year exceeded that of any previous
year in the history of the service, but the saving of both life and property
was greater than ever before in proportion to the value of the property
involved and to the number of persons imperiled.

The operations of the Marine-Hospital Service, the Revenue-Cutter Service, the
Steamboat-Inspection Service, the Light-House Service, the Bureau of
Navigation, and other branches of public work attached to the Treasury
Department, together with various recommendations concerning their support and
improvement, are fully stated in the report of the Secretary of the Treasury,
to which the attention of the Congress is especially invited.

The report of the Secretary of War exhibits satisfactory conditions in the
several branches of the public service intrusted to his charge.

The limit of our military force as fixed by law is constantly and readily
maintained. The present discipline and morale of our Army are excellent, and
marked progress and efficiency are apparent throughout its entire
organization.

With the exception of delicate duties in the suppression of slight Indian
disturbances along our southwestern boundary, in which the Mexican troops
cooperated, and the compulsory but peaceful return, with the consent of Great
Britain, of a band of Cree Indians from Montana to the British possessions, no
active operations have been required of the Army during the year past.

Changes in methods of administration, the abandonment of unnecessary posts and
consequent concentration of troops, and the exercise of care and vigilance by
the various officers charged with the responsibility in the expenditure of the
appropriations have resulted in reducing to a minimum the cost of maintenance
of our military establishment.

During the past year the work of constructing permanent infantry and cavalry
posts has been continued at the places heretofore designated. The Secretary of
War repeats his recommendation that appropriations for barracks and quarters
should more strictly conform to the needs of the service as judged by the
Department rather than respond to the wishes and importunities of localities.
It is imperative that much of the money provided for such construction should
now be allotted to the erection of necessary quarters for the garrisons
assigned to the coast defenses, where many men will be needed to properly care
for and operate modern guns. It is essential, too, that early provision be
made to supply the necessary force of artillery to meet the demands of this
service.

The entire Army has now been equipped with the new magazine arms, and wise
policy demands that all available public and private resources should be so
employed as to provide within a reasonable time a sufficient number to supply
the State militia with these modern weapons and provide an ample reserve for
any emergency.

The organized militia numbers 112,879 men. The appropriations for its support
by the several States approximate $2,800,000 annually, and $400,000 is
contributed by the General Government. Investigation shows these troops to be
usually well drilled and inspired with much military interest, but in many
instances they are so deficient in proper arms and equipment that a sudden
call to active duty would find them inadequately prepared for field service. I
therefore recommend that prompt measures be taken to remedy this condition and
that every encouragement be given to this deserving body of unpaid and
voluntary citizen soldiers, upon whose assistance we must largely rely in time
of trouble.

During the past year rapid progress has been made toward the completion of the
scheme adopted for the erection and armament of fortifications along our
seacoast, while equal progress has been made in providing the material for
submarine defense in connection with these works.

It is peculiarly gratifying at this time to note the great advance that has
been made in this important undertaking since the date of my annual message to
the Fifty-third Congress at the opening of its second session, in December,
1893. At that time I informed the Congress of the approaching completion of
nine 12-inch, twenty 10-inch, and thirty-four 8-inch high-power steel guns and
seventy-five 12-inch rifled mortars.

This total then seemed insignificant when compared with the great work
remaining to be done. Yet it was none the less a source of satisfaction to
every citizen when he reflected that it represented the first installment of
the new ordnance of American design and American manufacture and demonstrated
our ability to supply from our own resources guns of unexcelled power and
accuracy.

At that date, however, there were practically no carriages upon which to mount
these guns and only thirty-one emplacements for guns and sixty-four for
mortars. Nor were all these emplacements in condition to receive their
armament. Only one high-power gun was at that time in position for the defense
of the entire coast.

Since that time the number of guns actually completed has been increased to a
total of twenty-one 12-inch, fifty-six 10-inch, sixty-one 8-inch high-power
breech-loading steel guns, ten rapid-fire guns, and eighty 12-inch rifled
mortars. In addition there are in process of construction one 16-inch-type
gun, fifty 12-inch, fifty-six 10-inch, twenty-seven 8-inch high-power guns,
and sixty-six 12-inch rifled mortars; in all, four hundred and twenty-eight
guns and mortars.

During the same year, immediately preceding the message referred to, the first
modern gun carriage had been completed and eleven more were in process of
construction. All but one were of the nondisappearing type. These, however,
were not such as to secure necessary cover for the artillery gunners against
the intense fire of modern machine rapid-fire and high-power guns.

The inventive genius of ordnance and civilian experts has been taxed in
designing carriages that would obviate this fault, resulting, it is believed,
in the solution of this difficult problem. Since 1893 the number of gun
carriages constructed or building has been raised to a total of 129, of which
90 are on the disappearing principle, and the number of mortar carriages to
152, while the 95 emplacements which were provided for prior to that time have
been increased to 280 built and building.

This improved situation is largely due to the recent generous response of
Congress to the recommendations of the War Department.

Thus we shall soon have complete about one-fifth of the comprehensive system
the first step in which was noted in my message to the Congress of December 4,
1893.

When it is understood that a masonry emplacement not only furnishes a platform
for the heavy modern high-power gun, but also in every particular serves the
purpose and takes the place of the fort of former days, the importance of the
work accomplished is better comprehended.

In the hope that the work will be prosecuted with no less vigor in the future,
the Secretary of War has submitted an estimate by which, if allowed, there
will be provided and either built or building by the end of the next fiscal
year such additional guns, mortars, gun carriages, and emplacements as will
represent not far from one-third of the total work to be done under the plan
adopted for our coast defenses, thus affording a prospect that the entire work
will be substantially completed within six years. In less time than that,
however, we shall have attained a marked degree of security.

The experience and results of the past year demonstrate that with a
continuation of present careful methods the cost of the remaining work will be
much less than the original estimate.

We should always keep in mind that of all forms of military preparation coast
defense alone is essentially pacific in its nature. While it gives the sense
of security due to a consciousness of strength, it is neither the purpose nor
the effect of such permanent fortifications to involve us in foreign
complications, but rather to guarantee us against them. They are not
temptation to war, but security against it. Thus they are thoroughly in accord
with all the traditions of our national diplomacy.

The Attorney-General presents a detailed and interesting statement of the
important work done under his supervision during the last fiscal year.

The ownership and management by the Government of penitentiaries for the
confinement of those convicted in United States courts of violations of
Federal laws, which for many years has been a subject of Executive
recommendation, have at last to a slight extent been realized by the
utilization of the abandoned military prison at Fort Leavenworth as a United
States penitentiary.

This is certainly a movement in the right direction, but it ought to be at
once supplemented by the rebuilding or extensive enlargement of this
improvised prison and the construction of at least one more, to be located in
the Southern States. The capacity of the Leavenworth penitentiary is so
limited that the expense of its maintenance, calculated at a per capita rate
upon the number of prisoners it can accommodate, does not make as economical
an exhibit as it would if it were larger and better adapted to prison
purposes; but I am thoroughly convinced that economy, humanity, and a proper
sense of responsibility and duty toward those whom we punish for violations of
Federal law dictate that the Federal Government should have the entire control
and management of the penitentiaries where convicted violators are confined.

It appears that since the transfer of the Fort Leavenworth Military Prison to
its new uses the work previously done by prisoners confined there, and for
which expensive machinery has been provided, has been discontinued. This work
consisted of the manufacture of articles for army use, now done elsewhere. On
all grounds it is exceedingly desirable that the convicts confined in this
penitentiary be allowed to resume work of this description.

It is most gratifying to note the satisfactory results that have followed the
inauguration of the new system provided for by the act of May 28, 1896, under
which certain Federal officials are compensated by salaries instead of fees.
The new plan was put in operation on the 1st day of July, 1896, and already
the great economy it enforces, its prevention of abuses, and its tendency to a
better enforcement of the laws are strikingly apparent. Detailed evidence of
the usefulness of this long-delayed but now happily accomplished reform will
be found clearly set forth in the Attorney-General's report.

Our Post-Office Department is in good condition, and the exhibit made of its
operations during the fiscal year ended June 30, 1896, if allowance is made
for imperfections in the laws applicable to it, is very satisfactory. The
total receipts during the year were $82,499,208.40. The total expenditures
were $90,626,296.84, exclusive of the $1,559,898.27 which was earned by the
Pacific Railroad for transportation and credited on their debt to the
Government. There was an increase of receipts over the previous year of
$5,516,080.21, or 7.1 per cent, and an increase of expenditures of
$3,836,124.02, or 4.42 per cent. The deficit was $1,679,956.19 less than that
of the preceding year. The chief expenditures of the postal service are
regulated by law and are not in the control of the Postmaster-General. All
that he can accomplish by the most watchful administration and economy is to
enforce prompt and thorough collection and accounting for public moneys and
such minor savings in small expenditures and in letting those contracts, for
post-office supplies and star service, which are not regulated by statute.

An effective cooperation between the Auditor's Office and the Post-Office
Department and the making and enforcement of orders by the Department
requiring immediate notification to their sureties of all delinquencies on the
part of postmasters, and compelling such postmasters to make more frequent
deposits of postal funds, have resulted in a prompter auditing of their
accounts and much less default to the Government than heretofore.

The year's report shows large extensions of both star-route service and
railway mail service, with increased postal facilities. Much higher accuracy
in handling mails has also been reached, as appears by the decrease of errors
in the railway mail service and the reduction of mail matter returned to the
Dead-Letter Office.

The deficit for the last year, although much less than that of the last and
preceding years, emphasizes the necessity for legislation to correct the
growing abuse of second-class rates, to which the deficiency is mainly
attributable. The transmission at the rate of 1 cent a pound of serial
libraries, advertising sheets," house organs" (periodicals advertising some
particular "house" or institution), sample copies, and the like ought
certainly to be discontinued. A glance at the revenues received for the work
done last year will show more plainly than any other statement the gross abuse
of the postal service and the growing waste of its earnings.

The free matter carried in the mails for the Departments, offices, etc., of
the Government and for Congress, in pounds, amounted to 94,480,189.

If this is offset against buildings for post-offices and stations, the rental
of which would more than compensate for such free postal service, we have this
exhibit:

Weight of mail matter (other than above) transmitted through the mails for the
year ending June 30, 1896. Class

Weight

Revenue

Pounds

1. Domestic and foreign letters and postal cards, etc 	65,337,343
	$60,624,464 2. Newspapers and periodicals, 1 cent per pound
	348,988,648 	2,996,403 3. Books, seeds, etc., 8 cents a pound
	78,701,148 	10,324,069 4. Parcels, etc., 16 cents a pound
	19,950,187 	3,129,321

Total 	512,977,326 	77,044,257

The remainder of our postal revenue, amounting to something more than
$5,000,000, was derived from box rents, registry fees, money-order business,
and other similar items.

The entire expenditures of the Department, including pay for transportation
credited to the Pacific railroads, were $92,186,195.11, which may be
considered as the cost of receiving, carrying, and delivering the above mail
matter. It thus appears that though the second-class matter constituted more
than two-thirds of the total that was carried, the revenue derived from it was
less than one-thirtieth of the total expense. The average revenue was--

From each pound of first-class matter .........cents 	93.0 From each pound
of second class ...............mills 	8.5 From each pound of third class
...................cents 	13.1 From each pound of fourth class
..................do 	15.6 Of the second class 52,348,297 was county-free
matter.

The growth in weight of second-class matter has been from 299,000,000 pounds
in 1894 to 312,000,000 in 1895 and to almost 349,000,000 in 1896, and it is
quite evident this increasing drawback is far outstripping any possible growth
of postal revenues.

Our mail service should of course be such as to meet the wants and even the
conveniences of our people at a direct charge upon them so light as perhaps to
exclude the idea of our Post-Office Department being a money-making concern;
but in the face of a constantly recurring deficiency in its revenues and in
view of the fact that we supply the best mail service in the world it seems to
me it is quite time to correct the abuses that swell enormously our annual
deficit. If we concede the public policy of carrying weekly newspapers free in
the county of publication, and even the policy of carrying at less than
one-tenth of their cost other bona fide newspapers and periodicals, there can
be no excuse for subjecting the service to the further immense and increasing
loss involved in carrying at the nominal rate of 1 cent a pound the serial
libraries, sometimes including trashy and even harmful literature, and other
matter which under the loose interpretation of a loose statute have been
gradually given second-class rates, thus absorbing all profitable returns
derived from first-class matter, which pays three or four times more than its
cost, and producing a large annual loss to be paid by general taxation. If
such second-class matter paid merely the cost of its handling, our deficit
would disappear and a surplus result which might be used to give the people
still better mail facilities or cheaper rates of letter postage. I recommend
that legislation be at once enacted to correct these abuses and introduce
better business ideas in the regulation of our postal rates.

Experience and observation have demonstrated that certain improvements in the
organization of the Post-Office Department must be secured before we can gain
the full benefit of the immense sums expended in its administration. This
involves the following reforms, which I earnestly recommend:

There should be a small addition to the existing inspector service, to be
employed in the supervision of the carrier force, which now numbers 13,000 men
and performs its service practically without the surveillance exercised over
all other branches of the postal or public service. Of course such a lack of
supervision and freedom from wholesome disciplinary restraints must inevitably
lead to imperfect service. There should also be appointed a few inspectors who
could assist the central office in necessary investigation concerning matters
of post-office leases, post-office sites, allowances for rent, fuel, and
lights, and in organizing and securing the best results from the work of the
14,000 clerks now employed in first and second class offices.

I am convinced that the small expense attending the inauguration of these
reforms would actually be a profitable investment.

I especially recommend such a recasting of the appropriations by Congress for
the Post-Office Department as will permit the Postmaster-General to proceed
with the work of consolidating post-offices. This work has already been
entered upon sufficiently to fully demonstrate by experiment and experience
that such consolidation is productive of better service, larger revenues, and
less expenditures, to say nothing of the further advantage of gradually
withdrawing post-offices from the spoils system.

The Universal Postal Union, which now embraces all the civilized world and
whose delegates will represent 1,000,000,000 people, will hold its fifth
congress in the city of Washington in May, 1897. The United States may be said
to have taken the initiative which led to the first meeting of this congress,
at Berne in 1874, and the formation of the Universal Postal Union, which
brings the postal service of all countries to every man's neighborhood and has
wrought marvels in cheapening postal rates and securing absolutely safe mail
communication throughout the world. Previous congresses have met in Berne,
Paris, Lisbon, and Vienna, and the respective countries in which they have
assembled have made generous provision for their accommodation and for the
reception and entertainment of the delegates.

In view of the importance of this assemblage and of its deliberations and of
the honors and hospitalities accorded to our representatives by other
countries on similar occasions, I earnestly hope that such an appropriation
will be made for the expenses necessarily attendant upon the coming meeting in
our capital city as will be worthy of our national hospitality and indicative
of our appreciation of the event.

The work of the Navy Department and its present condition are fully exhibited
in the report of the Secretary.

The construction of vessels for our new Navy has been energetically prosecuted
by the present Administration upon the general lines previously adopted, the
Department having seen no necessity for radical changes in prior methods,
under which the work was found to be progressing in a manner highly
satisfactory. It has been decided, however, to provide in every shipbuilding
contract that the builder should pay all trial expenses, and it has also been
determined to pay no speed premiums in future contracts. The premiums recently
earned and some yet to be decided are features of the contracts made before
this conclusion was reached.

On March 4, 1893, there were in commission but two armored vessels--the
double-turreted monitors Miantonomoh and Monterey. Since that date, of vessels
theretofore authorized, there have been placed in their first commission 3
first-class and 2 second-class battle ships, 2 armored cruisers, 1
harbor-defense ram, and 5 double-turreted monitors, including the Maine and
the Puritan, just completed. Eight new unarmored cruisers and 2 new gunboats
have also been commissioned. The Iowa, another battle ship, will be completed
about March 1, and at least 4 more gunboats will be ready for sea in the early
spring.

It is gratifying to state that our ships and their outfits are believed to be
equal to the best that can be manufactured elsewhere, and that such notable
reductions have been made in their cost as to justify the statement that quite
a number of vessels are now being constructed at rates as low as those that
prevail in European shipyards.

Our manufacturing facilities are at this time ample for all possible naval
contingencies. Three of our Government navy-yards--those at Mare Island, Cal.,
Norfolk, Va., and Brooklyn, N. Y.--are equipped for shipbuilding, our ordnance
plant in Washington is equal to any in the world, and at the torpedo station
we are successfully making the highest grades of smokeless powder. The
first-class private shipyards at Newport News, Philadelphia, and San Francisco
are building battle ships; eleven contractors, situated in the States of
Maine, Rhode Island, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Maryland, Virginia, and the
State of Washington, are constructing gunboats or torpedo boats; two plants
are manufacturing large quantities of first-class armor, and American
factories are producing automobile torpedoes, powder, projectiles, rapid-fire
guns, and everything else necessary for the complete outfit of naval vessels.

There have been authorized by Congress since March, 1893, 5 battle ships, 6
light-draft gunboats, 16 torpedo boats, and 1 submarine torpedo boat.
Contracts for the building of all of them have been let. The Secretary
expresses the opinion that we have for the present a sufficient supply of
cruisers and gunboats, and that hereafter the construction of battle ships and
torpedo boats will supply our needs.

Much attention has been given to the methods of carrying on departmental
business. Important modifications in the regulations have been made, tending
to unify the control of shipbuilding as far as may be under the Bureau of
Construction and Repair, and also to improve the mode of purchasing supplies
for the Navy by the Bureau of Supplies and Accounts. The establishment under
recent acts of Congress of a supply fund with which to purchase these supplies
in large quantities and other modifications of methods have tended materially
to their cheapening and better quality.

The War College has developed into an institution which it is believed will be
of great value to the Navy in teaching the science of war, as well as in
stimulating professional zeal in the Navy, and it will be especially useful in
the devising of plans for the utilization in case of necessity of all the
naval resources of the United States.

The Secretary has persistently adhered to the plan he found in operation for
securing labor at navy-yards through boards of labor employment, and has done
much to make it more complete and efficient. The naval officers who are
familiar with this system and its operation express the decided opinion that
its results have been to vastly improve the character of the work done at our
yards and greatly reduce its cost.

Discipline among the officers and men of the Navy has been maintained to a
high standard and the percentage of American citizens enlisted has been very
much increased.

The Secretary is considering and will formulate during the coming winter a
plan for laying up ships in reserve, thereby largely reducing the cost of
maintaining our vessels afloat. This plan contemplates that battle ships,
torpedo boats, and such of the cruisers as are not needed for active service
at sea shall be kept in reserve with skeleton crews on board to keep them in
condition, cruising only enough to insure the efficiency of the ships and
their crews in time of activity.

The economy to result from this system is too obvious to need comment.

The Naval Militia, which was authorized a few years ago as an experiment, has
now developed into a body of enterprising young men, active and energetic in
the discharge of their duties and promising great usefulness. This
establishment has nearly the same relation to our Navy as the National Guard
in the different States bears to our Army, and it constitutes a source of
supply for our naval forces the importance of which is immediately apparent.

The report of the Secretary of the Interior presents a comprehensive and
interesting exhibit of the numerous and important affairs committed to his
supervision. It is impossible in this communication to do more than briefly
refer to a few of the subjects concerning which the Secretary gives full and
instructive information.

The money appropriated on account of this Department and for its disbursement
for the fiscal year ended June 30, 1896, amounted to more than $157,000,000,
or a greater sum than was appropriated for the entire maintenance of the
Government for the two fiscal years ended June 30, 1861.

Our public lands, originally amounting to 1,840,000,000 acres, have been so
reduced that only about 600,000,000 acres still remain in Government control,
excluding Alaska. The balance, being by far the most valuable portion, has
been given away to settlers, to new States, and to railroads or sold at a
comparatively nominal sum. The patenting of land in execution of railroad
grants has progressed rapidly during the year, and since the 4th day of March,
1893, about 25,000,000 acres have thus been conveyed to these corporations.

I agree with the Secretary that the remainder of our public lands should be
more carefully dealt with and their alienation guarded by better economy and
greater prudence.

The commission appointed from the membership of the National Academy of
Sciences, provided for by an act of Congress, to formulate plans for a
national forestry system will, it is hoped, soon be prepared to present the
result of thorough and intelligent examination of this important subject.

The total Indian population of the United States is 177,235, according to a
census made in 1895, exclusive of those within the State of New York and those
comprising the Five Civilized Tribes. Of this number there are approximately
38,000 children of school age. During the year 23,393 of these were enrolled
in schools. The progress which has attended recent efforts to extend
Indian-school facilities and the anticipation of continued liberal
appropriations to that end can not fail to afford the utmost satisfaction to
those who believe that the education of Indian children is a prime factor in
the accomplishment of Indian civilization.

It may be said in general terms that in every particular the improvement of
the Indians under Government care has been most marked and encouraging.

The Secretary, the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, and the agents having
charge of Indians to whom allotments have been made strongly urge the passage
of a law prohibiting the sale of liquor to allottees who have taken their
lands in severalty. I earnestly join in this recommendation and venture to
express the hope that the Indian may be speedily protected against this
greatest of all obstacles to his well-being and advancement.

The condition of affairs among the Five Civilized Tribes, who occupy large
tracts of land in the Indian Territory and who have governments of their own,
has assumed such an aspect as to render it almost indispensable that there
should be an entire change in the relations of these Indians to the General
Government. This seems to be necessary in furtherance of their own interests,
as well as for the protection of non-Indian residents in their territory. A
commission organized and empowered under several recent laws is now
negotiating with these Indians for the relinquishment of their courts and the
division of their common lands in severalty and are aiding in the settlement
of the troublesome question of tribal membership. The reception of their first
proffers of negotiation was not encouraging, but through patience and such
conduct on their part as demonstrated that their intentions were friendly and
in the interest of the tribes the prospect of success has become more
promising. The effort should be to save these Indians from the consequences of
their own mistakes and improvidence and to secure to the real Indian his
rights as against intruders and professed friends who profit by his
retrogression. A change is also needed to protect life and property through
the operation of courts conducted according to strict justice and strong
enough to enforce their mandates.

As a sincere friend of the Indian, I am exceedingly anxious that these reforms
should be accomplished with the consent and aid of the tribes and that no
necessity may be presented for radical or drastic legislation I hope,
therefore, that the commission now conducting negotiations will soon be able
to report that progress has been made toward a friendly adjustment of existing
difficulties.

It appears that a very valuable deposit of gilsonite or asphaltum has been
found on the reservation in Utah occupied by the Uncompahgre Ute Indians.
Every consideration of care for the public interest and every sensible
business reason dictate such management or disposal of this important source
of public revenue as will except it from the general rules and incidents
attending the ordinary disposition of public lands and secure to the
Government a fair share at least of its advantages in place of its transfer
for a nominal sum to interested individuals.

I indorse the recommendation made by the present Secretary of the Interior, as
well as his predecessor, that a permanent commission, consisting of three
members, one of whom shall be an army officer, be created to perform the
duties now devolving upon the Commissioner and Assistant Commissioner of
Indian Affairs. The management of the Bureau involves such numerous and
diverse details and the advantages of an uninterrupted policy are so apparent
that I hope the change suggested will meet the approval of the Congress.

The diminution of our enormous pension roll and the decrease of pension
expenditure, which have been so often confidently for told, still fail in
material realization. The number of pensioners on the polls at the close of
the fiscal year ended June 30, 1896, was 970,678. This is the largest number
ever reported. The amount paid exclusively for pensions during the year was
$138,214,761.94, a slight decrease from that of the preceding year, while the
total expenditures on account of pensions, including the cost of maintaining
the Department and expenses attending pension distribution, amounted to
$142,206,550.59, or within every small fraction of one-third of the entire
expense of supporting the Government during the same year. The number of new
pension certificates issued was 90,640. Of these, 40,374 represent original
allowances of claims and 15,878 increases of existing pensions.

The number of persons receiving pensions from the United States, but residing
in foreign countries, at the close of the last fiscal year was 3,781, and the
amount paid to them during the year was $582,735.38.

The sum appropriated for the payment of pensions for the current fiscal year,
ending June 30, 1897, is $140,000,000, and for the succeeding year it is
estimated that the same amount will be necessary.

The Commissioner of Pensions reports that during the last fiscal year 339
indictments were found against violators of the pension laws. Upon these
indictments 167 convictions resulted.

In my opinion, based upon such statements as these and much other information
and observation, the abuses which have been allowed to creep into our pension
system have done incalculable harm in demoralizing our people and undermining
good citizenship. I have endeavored within my sphere of official duty to
protect our pension roll and make it what it should be, a roll of honor,
containing the names of those disabled in their country's service and worthy
of their country's affectionate remembrance. When I have seen those who pose
as the soldiers' friends active and alert in urging greater laxity and more
reckless pension expenditure, while nursing selfish schemes, I have deprecated
the approach of a situation when necessary retrenchment and enforced economy
may lead to an attack upon pension abuses so determined as to overlook the
discrimination due to those who, worthy of a nation's care, ought to live and
die under the protection of a nation's gratitude.

The Secretary calls attention to the public interests involved in an
adjustment of the obligations of the Pacific railroads to the Government. I
deem it to be an important duty to especially present this subject to the
consideration of the Congress.

On January 1, 1897, with the amount already matured, more than $13,000,000 of
the principal of the subsidy bonds issued by the United States in aid of the
construction of the Union Pacific Railway, including its Kansas line, and more
than $6,000,000 of like bonds issued in aid of the Central Pacific Railroad,
including those issued to the Western Pacific Railroad Company, will have
fallen due and been paid or must on that day be paid by the Government.
Without any reference to the application of the sinking fund now in the
Treasury, this will create such a default on the part of these companies to
the Government as will give it the right to at once institute proceedings to
foreclose its mortgage lien. In addition to this indebtedness, which will be
due January 1, 1897, there will mature between that date and January 1, 1899,
the remaining principal of such subsidy bonds, which must also be met by the
Government. These amount to more than $20,000,000 on account of the Union
Pacific lines and exceed $21,000,000 on account of the Central Pacific lines.

The situation of these roads and the condition of their indebtedness to the
Government have been fully set forth in the reports of various committees to
the present and prior Congresses, and as early as 1887 they were thoroughly
examined by a special commission appointed pursuant to an act of Congress. The
considerations requiring an adjustment of the Government's relations to the
companies have been clearly presented and the conclusion reached with
practical uniformity that if these relations are not terminated they should be
revised upon a basis securing their safe continuance.

Under section 4 of the act of Congress passed March 3, 1887, the President is
charged with the duty, in the event that any mortgage or other incumbrance
paramount to the interest of the United States in the property of the Pacific
railroads should exist and be lawfully liable to be enforced, to direct the
action of the Departments of Treasury and of justice in the protection of the
interest of the United States by redemption or through judicial proceedings,
including foreclosures of the Government liens.

In view of the fact that the Congress has for a number of years almost
constantly had under consideration various plans for dealing with the
conditions existing between these roads and the Government, I have thus far
felt justified in withholding action under the statute above mentioned.

In the case of the Union Pacific Company, however, the situation has become
especially and immediately urgent. Proceedings have been instituted to
foreclose a first mortgage upon those aided parts of the main lines upon which
the Government holds a second and subordinate mortgage lien. In consequence of
those proceedings and increasing complications, added to the default occurring
on the 1st day of January, 1897, a condition will be presented at that date,
so far as this company is concerned, that must emphasize the mandate of the
act of 1887 and give to Executive duty under its provisions a more imperative
aspect. Therefore, unless Congress shall otherwise direct or shall have
previously determined upon a different solution of the problem, there will
hardly appear to exist any reason for delaying beyond the date of the default
above mentioned such Executive action as will promise to subserve the public
interests and save the Government from the loss threatened by further
inaction.

The Department of Agriculture is so intimately related to the welfare of our
people and the prosperity of our nation that it should constantly receive the
care and encouragement of the Government. From small beginnings it has grown
to be the center of agricultural intelligence and the source of aid and
encouragement to agricultural efforts. Large sums of money are annually
appropriated for the maintenance of this Department, and it must be confessed
that the legislation relating to it has not always been directly in the
interest of practical farming or properly guarded against waste and
extravagance. So far, however, as public money has been appropriated fairly
and sensibly to help those who actually till the soil, no expenditure has been
more profitably made or more generally approved by the people.

Under the present management of the Department its usefulness has been
enhanced in every direction, and at the same time strict economy has been
enforced to the utmost extent permitted by Congressional action. From the
report of the Secretary it appears that through careful and prudent financial
management he has annually saved a large sum from his appropriations,
aggregating during his incumbency and up to the close of the present fiscal
year nearly one-fifth of the entire amount appropriated. These results have
been accomplished by a conscientious study of the real needs of the farmer and
such a regard for economy as the genuine farmer ought to appreciate,
supplemented by a rigid adherence to civil-service methods in a Department
which should be conducted in the interest of agriculture instead of partisan
politics.

The Secretary reports that the value of our exports of farm products during
the last fiscal year amounted to $570,000,000, an increase of $17,000,000 over
those of the year immediately preceding. This statement is not the less
welcome because of the fact that, notwithstanding such increase, the
proportion of exported agricultural products to our total exports of all
descriptions fell off during the year. The benefits of an increase in
agricultural exports being assured, the decrease in its proportion to our
total exports is the more gratifying when we consider that it is owing to the
fact that such total exports for the year increased more than $75,000,000.

The large and increasing exportation of our agricultural products suggests the
great usefulness of the organization lately established in the Department for
the purpose of giving to those engaged in farming pursuits reliable
information concerning the condition, needs, and advantages of different
foreign markets. Inasmuch as the success of the farmer depends upon the
advantageous sale of his products, and inasmuch as foreign markets must
largely be the destination of such products, it is quite apparent that a
knowledge of the conditions and wants that affect those markets ought to
result in sowing more intelligently and reaping with a better promise of
profit. Such information points out the way to a prudent foresight in the
selection and cultivation of crops and to a release from the bondage of
unreasoning monotony of production, a glutted and depressed market, and
constantly recurring unprofitable toil.

In my opinion the gratuitous distribution of seeds by the Department as at
present conducted ought to be discontinued. No one can read the statement of
the Secretary on this subject and doubt the extravagance and questionable
results of this practice. The professed friends of the farmer, and certainly
the farmers themselves, are naturally expected to be willing to rid a
Department devoted to the promotion of farming interests of a feature which
tends so much to its discredit.

The Weather Bureau, now attached to the Department of Agriculture, has
continued to extend its sphere of usefulness, and by an uninterrupted
improvement in the accuracy of its forecasts has greatly increased its
efficiency as an aid and protection to all whose occupations are related to
weather conditions.

Omitting further reference to the operations of the Department, I commend the
Secretary's report and the suggestions it contains to the careful
consideration of the Congress.

The progress made in civil-service reform furnishes a cause for the utmost
congratulation. It has survived the doubts of its friends as well as the
rancor of its enemies and has gained a permanent place among the agencies
destined to cleanse our politics and to improve, economize, and elevate the
public service.

There are now in the competitive classified service upward of 84,000 places,
more than half of these having been included from time to time since March 4,
1893. A most radical and sweeping extension was made by Executive order dated
the 6th day of May, 1896, and if fourth-class postmasterships are not included
in the statement it may be said that practically all positions contemplated by
the civil-service law are now classified. Abundant reasons exist for including
these postmaster-ships, based upon economy, improved service, and the peace
and quiet of neighborhoods. If, however, obstacles prevent such action at
present, I earnestly hope that Congress will, without increasing post-office
appropriations, so adjust them as to permit in proper eases a consolidation of
these post-offices, to the end that through this process the result desired
may to a limited extent be accomplished.

The civil-service rules as amended during the last year provide for a sensible
and uniform method of promotion, basing eligibility to better positions upon
demonstrated efficiency and faithfulness. The absence of fixed rules on this
subject has been an infirmity in the system more and more apparent as its
other benefits have been better appreciated.

The advantages of civil-service methods in their business aspects are too well
understood to require argument. Their application has become a necessity to
the executive work of the Government. But those who gain positions through the
operation of these methods should be made to understand that the nonpartisan
scheme through which they receive their appointments demands from them by way
of reciprocity nonpartisan and faithful performance of duty under every
Administration and cheerful fidelity to every chief. While they should be
encouraged to decently exercise their rights of citizenship and to support
through their suffrages the political beliefs they honestly profess, the
noisy, pestilent, and partisan employee, who loves political turmoil and
contention or who renders lax and grudging service to an Administration not
representing his political views, should be promptly and fearlessly dealt with
in such a way as to furnish a warning to others who may be likewise disposed.

The annual report of the Commissioners will be duly transmitted, and I commend
the important matter they have in charge to the careful consideration of the
Congress.

The Interstate Commerce Commission has during the last year supplied abundant
evidence of its usefulness and the importance of the work committed to its
charge.

Public transportation is a universal necessity, and the question of just and
reasonable charges therefor has become of vital importance not only to
shippers and carriers, but also to the vast multitude of producers and
consumers. The justice and equity of the principles embodied in the existing
law passed for the purpose of regulating these charges are everywhere
conceded, and there appears to be no question that the policy thus entered
upon has a permanent place in our legislation.

As the present statute when enacted was in the nature of the case more or less
tentative and experimental, it was hardly expected to supply a complete and
adequate system. While its wholesome effects are manifest and have amply
justified its enactment, it is evident that all desired reforms in
transportation methods have not been fully accomplished. In view of the
judicial interpretation which some provisions of this statute have received
and the defects disclosed by the efforts made for its enforcement, its
revision and amendment appear to be essential, to the end that it may more
effectually reach the evils designed to be corrected. I hope the
recommendations of the Commission upon this subject will be promptly and
favorably considered by the Congress.

I desire to recur to the statements elsewhere made concerning the Government's
receipts and expenditures for the purpose of venturing upon some suggestions
touching our present tariff law and its operation.

This statute took effect on the 28th day of August, 1894. Whatever may be its
shortcomings as a complete measure of tariff reform, it must be conceded that
it has opened the way to a freer and greater exchange of commodities between
us and other countries, and thus furnished a wider market for our products and
manufactures.

The only entire fiscal year during which this law has been in force ended on
the 30th day of June, 1896. In that year our imports increased over those of
the previous year more than $6,500,000, while the value of the domestic
products we exported and which found markets abroad was nearly $70,000,000
more than during the preceding year.

Those who insist that the cost to our people of articles coming to them from
abroad for their needful use should only be increased through tariff charges
to an extent necessary to meet the expenses of the Government, as well as
those who claim that tariff charges may be laid upon such articles beyond the
necessities of Government revenue and with the additional purpose of so
increasing their price in our markets as to give American manufacturers and
producers better and more profitable opportunities, must agree that our tariff
laws are only primarily justified as sources of revenue to enable the
Government to meet the necessary expenses of its maintenance. Considered as to
its efficiency in this aspect, the present law can by no means fall under just
condemnation. During the only complete fiscal year of its operation it has
yielded nearly $8,000,000 more revenue than was received from tariff duties in
the preceding year. There was, nevertheless, a deficit between our receipts
and expenditures of a little more than $25,000,000 This, however, was not
unexpected.

The situation was such in December last, seven months before the close of the
fiscal year, that the Secretary of the Treasury foretold a deficiency of
$17,000,000. The great and increasing apprehension and timidity in business
circles and the depression in all activities intervening since that time,
resulting from causes perfectly well understood and entirely disconnected with
our tariff law or its operation, seriously checked the imports we would have
otherwise received and readily account for the difference between this
estimate of the Secretary and the actual deficiency, as well as for a
continued deficit. Indeed, it must be confessed that we could hardly have had
a more unfavorable period than the last two years for the collection of tariff
revenue. We can not reasonably hope that our recuperation from this business
depression will be sudden, but it has already set in with a promise of
acceleration and continuance.

I believe our present tariff law, if allowed a fair opportunity, will in the
near future yield a revenue which, with reasonably economical expenditures,
will overcome all deficiencies. In the meantime no deficit that has occurred
or may occur need excite or disturb us. To meet any such deficit we have in
the Treasury in addition to a gold reserve of one hundred millions a surplus
of more than $128,000,000 applicable to the payment of the expenses of the
Government, and which must, unless expended for that purpose, remain a useless
hoard, or, if not extravagantly wasted, must in any event be perverted from
the purpose of its exaction from our people. The payment, therefore, of any
deficiency in the revenue from this fund is nothing more than its proper and
legitimate use. The Government thus applying a surplus fortunately in its
Treasury to the payment of expenses not met by its current revenues is not at
all to be likened to a man living beyond his income and thus incurring debt or
encroaching on his principal.

It is not one of the functions of our Government to accumulate and make
additions to a fund not needed for immediate expenditure. With individuals it
is the chief object of struggle and effort. The application of an accumulated
fund by the Government to the payment of its running expenses is a duty. An
individual living beyond his income and embarrassing himself with debt or
drawing upon his accumulated fund of principal is either unfortunate or
improvident. The distinction is between a government charged with the duty of
expending for the benefit of the people and for proper purposes all the money
it receives from any source, and the individual, who is expected to manifest a
natural desire to avoid debt or to accumulate as much as possible and to live
within the income derived from such accumulations, to the end that they may be
increased or at least remain unimpaired for the future use and enjoyment of
himself or the objects of his love and affection who may survive him.

It is immeasurably better to appropriate our surplus to the payment of
justifiable expenses than to allow it to become an invitation to reckless
appropriations and extravagant expenditures.

I suppose it will not be denied that under the present law our people obtain
the necessaries of a comfortable existence at a cheaper rate than formerly.
This is a matter of supreme importance, since it is the palpable duty of every
just government to make the burdens of taxation as light as possible. The
people should not be required to relinquish this privilege of cheaper living
except under the stress of their Government's necessity made plainly manifest.

This reference to the condition and prospects of our revenues naturally
suggests an allusion to the weakness and vices of our financial methods. They
have been frequently pressed upon the attention of Congress in previous
Executive communications and the inevitable danger of their continued
toleration pointed out. Without now repeating these details, I can not refrain
from again earnestly presenting the necessity of the prompt reform of a system
opposed to every rule of sound finance and shown by experience to be fraught
with the gravest peril and perplexity. The terrible Civil War, which shook the
foundations of our Government more than thirty years ago, brought in its train
the destruction of property, the wasting of our country's substance, and the
estrangement of brethren. These are now past and forgotten. Even the
distressing loss of life the conflict entailed is but a sacred memory which
fosters patriotic sentiment and keeps alive a tender regard for those who
nobly died. And yet there remains with us to-day in full strength and
activity, as an incident of that tremendous struggle, a feature of its
financial necessities not only unsuited to our present circumstances, but
manifestly a disturbing menace to business security and an ever-present agent
of monetary distress.

Because we may be enjoying a temporary relief from its depressing influence,
this should not lull us into a false security nor lead us to forget the
suddenness of past visitations.

I am more convinced than ever that we can have no assured financial peace and
safety until the Government currency obligations upon which gold may be
demanded from the Treasury are withdrawn from circulation and canceled. This
might be done, as has been heretofore recommended, by their exchange for
long-term bonds bearing a low rate of interest or by their redemption with the
proceeds of such bonds. Even if only the United States notes known as
greenbacks were thus retired it is probable that the Treasury notes issued in
payment of silver purchases under the act of July 14, 1890, now paid in gold
when demanded, would not create much disturbance, as they might from time to
time, when received in the Treasury by redemption in gold or otherwise, be
gradually and prudently replaced by silver coin.

This plan of issuing bonds for the purpose of redemption certainly appears to
be the most effective and direct path to the needed reform. In default of
this, however, it would be a step in the right direction if currency
obligations redeemable in gold whenever so redeemed should be canceled instead
of being reissued. This operation would be a slow remedy, but it would improve
present conditions.

National banks should redeem their own notes. They should be allowed to issue
circulation to the par value of bonds deposited as security for its redemption
and the tax on their circulation should be reduced to one-fourth of 1 per
cent.

In considering projects for the retirement of United States notes and Treasury
notes issued under the law of 1890, I am of the opinion that we have placed
too much stress upon the danger of contracting the currency and have
calculated too little upon the gold that would be added to our circulation if
invited to us by better and safer financial methods. It is not so much a
contraction of our currency that should be avoided as its unequal
distribution.

This might be obviated and any fear of harmful contraction at the same time
removed by allowing the organization of smaller banks and in less populous
communities than are now permitted, and also authorizing existing banks to
establish branches in small communities under proper restrictions.

The entire case may be presented by the statement that the day of sensible and
sound financial methods will not dawn upon us until our Government abandons
the banking business and the accumulation of funds and confines its monetary
operations to the receipt of the money contributed by the people for its
support and to the expenditure of such money for the people's benefit.

Our business interests and all good citizens long for rest from feverish
agitation and the inauguration by the Government of a reformed financial
policy which will encourage enterprise and make certain the rewards of labor
and industry.

Another topic in which our people rightfully take a deep interest may be here
briefly considered. I refer to the existence of trusts and other huge
aggregations of capital the object of which is to secure the monopoly of some
particular branch of trade, industry, or commerce and to stifle wholesome
competition. When these are defended, it is usually on the ground that though
they increase profits they also reduce prices, and thus may benefit the
public. It must be remembered, however, that a reduction of prices to the
people is not one of the real objects of these organizations, nor is their
tendency necessarily in that direction. If it occurs in a particular case it
is only because it accords with the purposes or interests of those managing
the scheme.

Such occasional results fall far short of compensating the palpable evils
charged to the account of trusts and monopolies. Their tendency is to crush
out individual independence and to hinder or prevent the free use of human
faculties and the full development of human character. Through them the
farmer, the artisan, and the small trader is in danger of dislodgment from the
proud position of being his own master, watchful of all that touches his
country's prosperity, in which he has an individual lot, and interested in all
that affects the advantages of business of which he is a factor, to be
relegated to the level of a mere appurtenance to a great machine, with little
free will, with no duty but that of passive obedience, and with little hope or
opportunity of rising in the scale of responsible and helpful citizenship.

To the instinctive belief that such is the inevitable trend of trusts and
monopolies is due the widespread and deep-seated popular aversion in which
they are held and the not unreasonable insistence that, whatever may be their
incidental economic advantages, their general effect upon personal character,
prospects, and usefulness can not be otherwise than injurious.

Though Congress has attempted to deal with this matter by legislation, the
laws passed for that purpose thus far have proved ineffective, not because of
any lack of disposition or attempt to enforce them, but simply because the
laws themselves as interpreted by the courts do not reach the difficulty. If
the insufficiencies of existing laws can be remedied by further legislation,
it should be done. The fact must be recognized, however, that all Federal
legislation on this subject may fall short of its purpose because of inherent
obstacles and also because of the complex character of our governmental
system, which, while making the Federal authority supreme within its sphere,
has carefully limited that sphere by metes and bounds that can not be
transgressed. The decision of our highest court on this precise question
renders it quite doubtful whether the evils of trusts and monopolies can be
adequately treated through Federal action unless they seek directly and
purposely to include in their objects transportation or intercourse between
States or between the United States and foreign countries.

It does not follow, however, that this is the limit of the remedy that may be
applied. Even though it may be found that Federal authority is not broad
enough to fully reach the case, there can be no doubt of the power of the
several States to act effectively in the premises, and there should be no
reason to doubt their willingness to judiciously exercise such power.

In concluding this communication its last words shall be an appeal to the
Congress for the most rigid economy in the expenditure of the money it holds
in trust for the people. The way to perplexing extravagance is easy, but a
return to frugality is difficult. When, however, it is considered that those
who bear the burdens of taxation have no guaranty of honest care save in the
fidelity of their public servants, the duty of all possible retrenchment is
plainly manifest.

When our differences are forgotten and our contests of political opinion are
no longer remembered, nothing in the retrospect of our public service will be
as fortunate and comforting as the recollection of official duty well
performed and the memory of a constant devotion to the interests of our
confiding fellow-countrymen.

GROVER CLEVELAND

